For other uses, see Baku (disambiguation).Baku
BakıClockwise: Details of the façade of the Ismailiyya building, Philharmony Fountain in front of the Magomayev  Philharmonic Hall
, a vessel on the Bay of Baku  with the skyline of the city, and the Maiden Tower  – clickable image
Coat of armsNickname(s): City of WindsBakuLocation in AzerbaijanCoordinates: 40°23′43″N 49°52′56″E﻿ /40.39528°N 49.88222°E﻿ /
40.39528; 49.88222Coordinates: 40°23′43″N 49°52′56″E﻿ /40.39528°N 49.88222°E﻿ / 40.39528; 49.88222CountryAzerbaijanGovernment
 • MayorHajibala AbutalybovArea[1] • City2,130 km2  (820 sq mi)Elevation−28 m (−92 ft)Population (2012)[3] • City2,122,300
 • Density996.38/km2  (2,580.6/sq mi) •Urban2,725,000[2] •Metro4,000,000Demonym(s)Bakuvian[4]Time zoneAZT  (UTC+4)Postal code
AZ1000Area code(s)(+994) 12Vehicle registration10–90 AZWebsitewww.baku-ih.gov.azUNESCO World Heritage SiteOfficial nameWalled City
of Baku with the Shirvanshah's Palace  and Maiden TowerTypeCulturalCriteriaivDesignated2000 (24th session)Reference no.958
Endangered2003–2009State PartyAzerbaijanRegionEurope and AsiaBaku  (Azerbaijani: Bakı, IPA:[bɑˈcɯ]) is the capital and largest city of Azerbaijan, as well as the largest city on the Caspian
Sea  and of the Caucasus  region. Baku is located 28 metres (92 ft) below sea level, which makes it the lowest lying national
capital in the world  and also the largest city in the world located below sea level. It is located on the southern shore of the 
Absheron Peninsula, alongside the Bay of Baku. At the beginning of 2009, Baku's urban population  was estimated at just over two
million people.[5]  Officially, about 25 percent of all inhabitants of the country live in Baku's metropolitan area.

Baku is divided into eleven administrative districts  (raions) and 48 townships. Among these are the townships on the islands of
the Baku Archipelago, and the town of Oil Rocks  built on stilts in the Caspian Sea, 60 kilometres (37 miles) away from Baku. The 
Inner City  of Baku, along with the Shirvanshah's Palace  and Maiden Tower, were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site  in
2000. According to the Lonely Planet's ranking, Baku is also among the world's top ten destinations for urban nightlife.[6]

The city is the scientific, cultural and industrial center of Azerbaijan. Many sizeable Azerbaijani institutions have their
headquarters there, including SOCAR, one of the world's top 100 companies.[7]  The Baku International Sea Trade Port  is capable
of handling two million tons of general and dry bulk cargoes per year.[8]  In recent years, Baku has become an important venue for
international events. It hosted the 57th Eurovision Song Contest  in 2012, the 2015 European Games, the 2016 European Grand Prix 
and will host the 4th Islamic Solidarity Games  in 2017 and UEFA Euro 2020.

The city is renowned for its harsh winds, which is reflected in its nickname, the "City of Winds".



ETYMOLOGY
Baku is derived from the Persian  name of the city باد-کوبه Bād-kube, meaning "Wind-pounded city", in which bād  means "wind" and 
kube  is rooted in the verb کوبیدن kubidan, "to pound", thus referring to a place where wind is strong and pounding.[9]  Indeed,
the city is renowned for its fierce winter snow storms and harsh winds. This is also reflected in the city's nickname as the "
City
of Winds". A less probable folk etymology  explains the name as deriving from Baghkuy, meaning "God's town". Baga  (now بغ  bagh)
and kuy  are the Old Persian  words for "god" and "town" respectively; the name Baghkuy  may be compared with Baghdād 
("God-given") in which dād  is the Old Persian word for "give". Arabic  sources refer to the city as Baku, Bakukh, Bakuya, and 
Bakuye, all of which seem to come from a Persian name.

HISTORY
Main articles: History of Baku  and Timeline of BakuANTIQUITY
Roman stone inscription in Gobustan  dating back to 84–96 A.D.Around 100,000 years ago, the territory of modern Baku and Absheron  was savanna  with rich flora and fauna. Traces of human
settlement go back to the Stone age. From the Bronze age  there have been rock carvings discovered near Bayil, and a bronze figure
of a small fish discovered in the territory of the Old City. This have led some to suggest the existence of a Bronze Age
settlement within the city's territory.[10]  Near Nardaran, in a place called Umid Gaya, a prehistoric observatory was discovered,
where on the rock the images of sun and various constellations are carved together with a primitive astronomic table.[11]  Further
archeological excavations revealed various prehistoric settlements, native temples, statues and other artifacts within the
territory of the modern city and around it.

In the 1st century, the Romans  organized two Caucasian campaigns and reached Baku. Near the city, in Gobustan, Roman inscriptions
dating from 84–96 AD were discovered. This is one of the earliest written evidences for Baku.[12]

RISE OF THE SHIRVANSHAHS AND THE SAFAVID ERA
See also: Shirvanshah
A miniature painting  marking the downfall of the Shirvanshahs at the hands of the Safavids.During the 8th century Baku was the
realm of the Shirvanshahs. The city frequently came under assault of the Khazars  and (starting from the 10th century) the Rus. 
Shirvanshah Akhsitan I  built a navy in Baku and successfully repelled another Rus assault in 1170. After a devastating earthquake
struck Shamakhy, the capital of Shirvan, Shirvanshah’s court moved to Baku in 1191.[13]

Relics from the sunken Sabayil Castle.The Shirvan era greatly influenced Baku and the remainder of Azerbaijan. Between the 12th
and 14th centuries, massive fortifications were undertaken in Baku and the surrounding towns. The Maiden Tower, the Ramana Tower,
the Nardaran Fortress, the Shagan Castle, the Mardakan Castle, the Round Castle  and also the famous Sabayil Castle  on the island
of the Bay of Baku  was built during this period. The city walls of Baku  were also rebuilt and strengthened.

By the early 16th century Baku's wealth and strategic position attracted the focus of its larger neighbors, and had already been
ruled in the previous two centuries by the in Iran centred Kara Koyunlu  and Ak Koyunlu. The fall of the Ak Koyunlu brought the
city immediately into the sphere of the newly formed Iranian Safavid dynasty, who, led by Shah Ismail I  laid siege to Baku in
1501 and captured it making it an integral part of his empire and the successive Iranian dynasties to come for the next centuries,
until the irrevocable cession in the first half of the 19th century. The House of Shirvan, who ruled Baku since the 9th century,
was extinguished in the course of the Safavid rule.

At this time the city was enclosed within the lines of strong walls, which were washed by the sea on one side and protected by a
wide trench on land. In 1540 Baku was again captured by the Safavid troops following a brief occupation by the Ottomans as a
result of the Battle of Chaldiran. In 1578 the Ottomans  captured Baku and held it till 1603, when it was again put under Iranian
control,[14]  under which it stayed, intermittently, up to the course of the 19th century. In 1604 the Baku fortress was destroyed
by Shah Abbas I.

DOWNFALL OF THE SAFAVIDS AND THE KHANATE OF BAKU
The fall of the Iranian Safavids gave rise to the various Caucasian khanates, most of whom were already established in the late
Safavid era while the rest were established during the rule of Iranian ruler Nader Shah. After the death of Nader Shah in 1747,
the semi-independent Persian-ruled[15][16][17]  principality of the Baku Khanate  was formed. It was ruled by Mirza Muhammed Khan
but soon became a dependency of the much stronger Quba Khanate. During the time, the population of Baku was small (approximately
5,000), and the economy was ruined as a result of constant warfare.

RUSSO-PERSIAN WARS AND IRAN'S FORCED CEDING
Painting of Baku's shoreline in 1861 by Alexey Bogolyubov.On 26 June 1723, after a long siege, Baku surrendered to the Russians and the Safavids were forced to cede the city alongside many
other of their Caucasian territories as confirmed in the 1723 Saint Petersburg Treaty.[18]  By 1730, the situation had
deteriorated for the Russians as Nadir Shah's  successes in Shirvan forced the Russians to make an agreement  near Ganja  on 10
March 1735, ceding the city and all other conquered territories in the Caucasus back to Iran.[19]

By the end of the 18th century, Tsarist  Russia now began a more firm policy with the intent to conquer all of the Caucasus
especially at the expense of Iran and to a lesser extent Turkey. In the spring of 1796, by Yekaterina II’s order, General 
Valerian
Zubov’s troops started a large campaign in the North Caucasus and Transcaucasia against Qajar  Persia following the sack of Tblisi 
 and Iran's subsequent restoring of ts suzerainty over Georgia and Dagestan.[20][21]  Zubov had sent 13,000 men to capture Baku,
and it was overrun subsequently without any resistance. On 13 June 1796, a Russian flotilla entered Baku Bay, and a garrison of
Russian troops was placed inside the city. Later, however, Pavel I  ordered the cessation of the campaign and the withdrawal of
Russian forces following his predecessor, Catherine the Great  her death. In March 1797, the tsarist troops left Baku and the city
became part of Iran  again.

In 1813, following the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813), Qajar Iran  was forced to sign the Treaty of Gulistan  with Russia, which
provided for the irrevocable cession of Baku and most of Iran's territories in the North Caucasus  and South Caucasus  to Russia.
However it was not until the aftermath of the Russo-Persian War (1826-1828)  and the Treaty of Turkmenchay  that Baku came under
nominal Russian rule and the city was irrevocably lost, as it was retaken by Iran during the war.[22]  When Baku was occupied by
the Russian troops during the war of 1804–1813, nearly the entire population of some 8,000 people was ethnic Tat.[23]

DISCOVERY OF OIL
Main article: Petroleum industry in Azerbaijan
Oil workers digging an oil well by hand at Bibi-Heybat.The first oil well  was mechanically drilled in the Bibi-Heybat  suburb of Baku in 1846, though a number of hand-dug wells predate
it. Large-scale oil exploration started in 1872, when Russian imperial authorities auctioned the parcels of oil-rich land around
Baku to private investors. The pioneer of oil extracting from the bottom of the sea was Polish geologist Witold Zglenicki.[24] 
Soon after that Swiss, British, French, Belgian, German, Swedish and American investors appeared in Baku. Among them were the
firms of the Nobel brothers  together with the family von Börtzell-Szuch  (Carl Knut Börtzell, who also owned the Livadia Palace)
and the Rothschild family. An industrial oil belt, better known as Black City, was established near Baku.

Professor A. V. Williams Jackson  of Columbia University wrote in his work From Constantinople to the Home of Omar Khayyam 
(1911):

Baku is a city founded upon oil, for to its inexhaustible founts of naphtha it owes its very existence, its maintenance, its
prosperity.... At present Baku produces one-fifth of the oil that is used in the world, and the immense output in crude petroleum
from this single city far surpasses that in any other district where oil is found. Verily, the words of the Scriptures find
illustration here: 'the rock poured me out rivers of oil.

Oil is in the air one breathes, in one's nostrils, in one's eyes, in the water of the morning bath (though not in the drinking
water, for that is brought in bottles from distant mineral springs), in one's starched linen – everywhere. This is the impression
one carries away from Baku, and it is certainly true in the environs.[25]

By the beginning of the 20th century almost half of world production was being extracted in Baku.[26]  The oil boom  contributed
to the massive growth of Baku. Between 1856 and 1910 Baku's population grew at a faster rate than that of London, Paris  or New
York.

WORLD WAR I
Soldiers and officers of the army of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic shortly after the Battle of Baku.Neftchiler Avenue  in
Baku, circa 1920.In 1917, after the October revolution  and amidst the turmoil of World War I  and the breakup of the Russian Empire, Baku came
under the control of the Baku Commune, which was led by veteran Bolshevik Stepan Shahumyan. Seeking to capitalize on the existing
inter-ethnic conflicts, by spring 1918, Bolsheviks inspired and condoned civil warfare in and around Baku. During the infamous 
March Days, Bolsheviks and Dashnaks  seeking to establish control over the Baku streets, were faced with armed Azerbaijani groups.
The Azerbaijanis suffered a crushing defeat by the united forces of the Baku Soviet and were massacred by Dashnak teams in what
was called March Days. An estimated 3–12,000 Azerbaijanis were killed in their own capital.[27][28]  After the massacre, on 28 May
1918, the Azerbaijani faction of the Transcaucasian Sejm  proclaimed the independence of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  (ADR)
in Ganja, thereby becoming the first Muslim-majority democratic  and secular  republic.[29]  The newly independent Azerbaijani
republic, being unable to defend the independence of the country on their own, asked the Ottoman Empire for military support in
accordance with clause 4 of the treaty between the two countries. Shortly after, Azerbaijani forces, with support of the Ottoman
Army of Islam  led by Nuru Pasha, started their advance into Baku, eventually capturing the city from the loose coalition of 
Bolsheviks, Esers, Dashnaks, Mensheviks  and British forces under the command of General Lionel Dunsterville  on 15 September
1918.

After the Battle of Baku, the Azerbaijani irregular troops, with the tacit support of the Turkish command, conducted four days of
pillaging and killing of 10–30,000[30]  of the Armenian residents of Baku. This pogrom was known as the September Days. Shortly
after this Baku was proclaimed the new capital of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic.

SOVIET CONQUEST
The independence of the Azerbaijani republic was a significant but a short lived chapter. On 28 April 1920, the 11th Red Army 
invaded Baku and reinstalled the Bolsheviks, making Baku the capital of the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic.

The city underwent many major changes. As a result, Baku played a great role in many branches of the Soviet life. Since about
1921, the city was headed by the Baku City Executive Committee, commonly known in Russian as Bakgorispolkom. Together with the
Baku Party Committee (known as the Baksovet), it developed the economic significance of the Caspian metropolis. From 1922 to 1930,
Baku was the venue for one of the major Trade fairs  of the Soviet Union, serving as a commercial bridgehead to Iran and the
Middle East.[31]

WORLD WAR II
Baku's growing importance as a major energy hub remained in sight of the major powers. During World War II  and the Nazi German
invasion of the southwestern Soviet Union, Baku had become of vital strategic importance. In fact, capturing the oil fields of
Baku  was one of the ultimate goals of Operation Edelweiss, carried out between May and November 1942. However the German Army's
closest approach to Baku was no closer than some 530 kilometres (329 miles) northwest of Baku in November 1942, falling far short
of the city's capture before being driven back during the Soviet Operation Little Saturn  in mid-December 1942.

FALL OF THE SOVIET UNION AND LATER
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Baku embarked on a process of restructuring on a scale unseen in its history.[32] 
Thousands of buildings from the Soviet period were demolished to make way for a green belt on its shores; parks and gardens were
built on the land reclaimed by filling up the beaches of the Baku Bay. Improvements were made in the general cleaning,
maintenance, and garbage collection, and these services are now at Western European standards. The city is growing dynamically and
developing at full speed on an east-west axis along the shores of the Caspian Sea.

GEOGRAPHY
Absheron Peninsular satellite image, Landsat 5, 6 September 2010Baku is situated on the western coast of Caspian Sea. In the vicinity of the city there are a number of mud volcanoes  (Keyraki,
Bogkh-bogkha, Lokbatan  and others) and salt lakes  (Boyukshor, Khodasan and so on).

CLIMATE
Baku has a temperate  semi-arid climate  (Köppen climate classification: BSk) with warm and dry summers, cool and occasionally wet
winters, and strong winds all year long. However, unlike many other cities with this climate, Baku does not see extremely hot
summers. This is largely because of its northerly latitude  and the fact that it is located on a peninsula on the shore of the
Caspian Sea. Baku and the Absheron Peninsula  on which it is situated, is the most arid part of Azerbaijan (precipitation  here is
around or less than 200 mm (8 in) a year). The majority of the light annual precipitation occurs in seasons other than summer, but
none of these seasons are particularly wet. During Soviet times, Baku with its long hours of sunshine and dry healthy climate, was
a vacation destination where citizens could enjoy beaches or relax in now-dilapidated spa  complexes overlooking the Caspian Sea.
The city's past as a Soviet industrial center has left it as one of the most polluted cities in the world.[33]

At the same time Baku is noted as a very windy city throughout the year, hence the city's nickname the "City of Winds", and
gale-force winds, the cold northern wind khazri  and the warm southern wind gilavar  are typical here in all seasons. Indeed, the
city is renowned for its fierce winter snow storms and harsh winds.[9]  The speed of the khazri  sometimes reaches 144 kph
(89 mph), which can cause damage to crops, trees and roof tiles.[34]

The daily mean temperature in July and August averages 26.4 °C (79.5 °F), and there is very little rainfall during that season.
During summer the khazri  sweeps through, bringing desired coolness. Winter is cool and occasionally wet, with the daily mean
temperature in January and February averaging 4.3 °C (39.7 °F). During winter the khazri  sweeps through, driven by polar air
masses; temperatures on the coast frequently drop below freezing and make it feel bitterly cold. Winter snow storms  are
occasional; snow  usually melts within a few days after each snowfall.

The average annual temperature in Baku and that of the Earth differ by less than 0.1 °C (0.18 °F): it is 14.2 °C (57.6 °F).[35]

Climate data for BakuMonthJanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecYearAverage high °C (°F)6.6
(43.9)6.3
(43.3)9.8
(49.6)16.4
(61.5)22.1
(71.8)27.3
(81.1)30.6
(87.1)29.7
(85.5)25.6
(78.1)19.6
(67.3)13.5
(56.3)9.7
(49.5)18.1
(64.6)Daily mean °C (°F)4.4
(39.9)4.2
(39.6)7.0
(44.6)12.9
(55.2)18.5
(65.3)23.5
(74.3)26.4
(79.5)26.3
(79.3)22.5
(72.5)16.6
(61.9)11.2
(52.2)7.3
(45.1)15.1
(59.2)Average low °C (°F)2.1
(35.8)2.0
(35.6)4.2
(39.6)9.4
(48.9)14.9
(58.8)19.7
(67.5)22.2
(72)22.9
(73.2)19.4
(66.9)13.6
(56.5)8.8
(47.8)4.8
(40.6)12.0
(53.6)Average precipitation  mm (inches)21
(0.83)20
(0.79)21
(0.83)18
(0.71)18
(0.71)8
(0.31)2
(0.08)6
(0.24)15
(0.59)25
(0.98)30
(1.18)26
(1.02)210
(8.27)Average precipitation days (≥ 0.1 mm)66543212266649Average snowy days (≥ 1 cm)43000000000310Mean monthly sunshine hours89.9
89.0124.0195.0257.3294.0313.1282.1222.0145.793.0102.32,207.4Source #1: World Meteorological Organisation  (UN),[36]  Hong Kong
Observatory[37]  for data of sunshine hoursSource #2: Meoweather (Snowy days)[38]ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
Today, Baku is divided into 12 rayons  (administrative districts) and 5 settlements of city type.[39][40]  The mayor, presently 
Hajibala Abutalybov, embodies the executive power of the city.[41]

 * Binagadi raion  (Binəqədi rayonu)
 * Garadagh raion  (Qaradağ rayonu)
 * Khatai raion  (Xətai rayonu)
 * Khazar raion  (Xəzər rayonu)
 * Narimanov raion  (Nərimanov rayonu)
 * Nasimi raion  (Nəsimi rayonu)

 * Nizami raion  (Nizami rayonu)
 * Pirallahy raion  (Pirallahı rayonu)
 * Sabail raion  (Səbail rayonu)
 * Sabunchu raion  (Sabunçu rayonu)
 * Surakhany raion  (Suraxanı rayonu)
 * Yasamal raion  (Yasamal rayonu)

DEMOGRAPHICS
Until 1988 Baku had very large Russian, Armenian, and Jewish populations which contributed to cultural diversity  and added in
various ways (music, literature, architecture and progressive outlook) to Baku's history. With the onset of the Karabakh War  and
the pogrom against Armenians  starting in January 1990, the city's large Armenian population was expelled.[42][43]  Under
Communism, the Soviets took over the majority of Jewish property in Baku and Kuba. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, 
Azerbaijani President  Heydar Aliyev  returned several synagogues and a Jewish college, nationalized by the Soviets, to the Jewish
community. He encouraged the restoration of these buildings and is well liked by the Jews of Azerbaijan. Renovation has begun on
seven of the original 11 synagogues, including the Gilah synagogue, built in 1896, and the large Kruei Synagogue.[44]

YearAzerbaijanis %Russians %Armenians %Jews %Others %Total1851[45]more than 50004055.5%7,4311886[46]37,53043.321,39024.724,49028.3
3910.52,8103.286,6111897[47]40,3413637,39933.419,09917.13,369311,69610.5111,9041903[48]44,25728,459,95538,526,15116,8n.a.n.a.
28,51318,3155,8761913[48]45,96221,476,28835,541,68019,49,6904,541,05219,1214,6721926[49]118,73726.2167,37336.976,65616.919,5894.3
70,97815.7453,3331939[50]215,48227.4343,06443.6118,65015.131,0503.979,37710.1787,6231959[51]211,37232.9223,24234.7137,11121.3
24,0573.756,7258.7652,5071970[52]586,05246.3351,09027.7207,46416.429,7162.388,1936.91,262,5151979[53]530,55652.4229,87322.7167,226
16.522,9162.362,8656.21,013,4361999[54]1,574,25288119,3716.73780.025,1640.389,68951,788,8542009[55]1,848,10790.3108,5255.31040
6,0560.683,0234.12,045,815ETHNIC GROUPS
The Armenian Saint Gregory the Illuminator's Church, BakuToday the vast majority of the population of Baku are ethnic Azerbaijanis  (more than 90%). When Baku was occupied by the Russian
troops during the war of 1804–1813, nearly the entire population of some 8,000 people was ethnic Tat.[23]  The intensive growth of
the population started in the middle of the 19th century when Baku was a small town with a population of about 7,000 people. The
population increased again from about 13,000 in the 1860s to 112,000 in 1897 and 215,000 in 1913, making Baku the largest city in
the Caucasus region.[56]

Baku has been a cosmopolitan city at certain times during its history, meaning ethnic Azerbaijanis did not constitute the majority
of population.[57]  In 2003 Baku additionally had 153,400 internally displaced persons  and 93,400 refugees.[58]

RELIGION
The 13th-century Bibi-Heybat Mosque. The mosque was built over the tomb of a descendant of Muhammad.[59]The urban landscape of
Baku is shaped by many communities. The religion with the largest community of followers is Islam. The majority of the Muslims are
 Shia Muslims, and the Republic of Azerbaijan has the second highest Shia population percentage in the world after Iran.[60]  The
city's notable mosques include Juma Mosque, Bibi-Heybat Mosque, Muhammad Mosque  and Taza Pir Mosque.

There are some other faiths practiced among the different ethnic groups within the country. By article 48 of its Constitution,
Azerbaijan is a secular state  and ensures religious freedom. Religious minorities include Russian Orthodox Christians, Catholic
Levantines, Georgian Orthodox Christians, Lutherans, Ashkenazi  Jews and Sufi  Muslims.

Zoroastrianism, although extinct in the city as well as in the rest of the country by the present time, had a long history in
Azerbaijan  and the Zoroastrian New Year  (Nowruz) continues to be the main holiday in the city as well as in the rest of
Azerbaijan.

ECONOMY
Baku's largest industry is petroleum, and its petroleum exports make it a large contributor to Azerbaijan's balance of payments.
The existence of petroleum has been known since the 8th century. In the 10th century, the Arabian traveler, Marudee, reported that
both white and black oil were being extracted naturally from Baku.[61]  By the 15th century, oil for lamps was obtained from
hand-dug surface wells. Commercial exploitation began in 1872, and by the beginning of the 20th century the Baku oil fields  were
the largest in the world. Towards the end of the 20th century much of the onshore petroleum had been exhausted, and drilling had
extended into the sea offshore. By the end of the 19th century skilled workers  and specialists flocked to Baku. By 1900 the city
had more than 3,000 oil wells, of which 2,000 were producing oil at industrial levels. Baku ranked as one of the largest centres
for the production of oil industry  equipment before World War II. The World War II Battle of Stalingrad  was fought to determine
who would have control of the Baku oil fields. Fifty years before the battle, Baku produced half of the world's oil supply.[62]

Currently the oil economy of Baku is undergoing a resurgence, with the development of the massive Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli  field
(Shallow water Gunashli by SOCAR, deeper areas by a consortium led by BP), development of the Shah Deniz gas field, the expansion
of the Sangachal Terminal  and the construction of the BTC Pipeline.

The Baku Stock Exchange  is Azerbaijan's largest stock exchange, and largest in the Caucasian  region by market capitalization. A
relatively large number of transnational companies are headquartered in Baku. One of the more prominent institutions headquartered
in Baku is the International Bank of Azerbaijan, which employs over 1,000 people. International banks with branches in Baku
include HSBC, Société Générale  and Credit Suisse.[63]

Skyscrapers in BakuFlame TowersAzersu TowerSOFAZ TowerTOURISM AND SHOPPING
Baku is one of the most important tourist destinations in the Caucasus, with hotels in the city earning 7 million euros in 2009.
[64]  Many sizable world hotel chains  have a presence in the city. Baku has many popular tourist and entertainment spots, such as
the downtown Fountains Square, the One and Thousand Nights Beach, Shikhov Beach  and Oil Rocks. Baku's vicinities feature Yanar
Dag, an ever-blazing spot of natural gas. On 2 September 2010, with the inauguration of National Flag Square, Baku became home to
the world's tallest flagpole, according to the Guinness Book of Records.[65][66]  However, on 24 May 2011 Baku lost this record by
just 3m to the city of Dushanbe in Tajikistan.[67]

Baku has several shopping malls; the most famous city center malls are Park Bulvar, Metro Park, 28 MALL, Aygun city  and AF MALL.
The retail areas contain shops from chain stores up to high-end boutiques.

The city is listed 48th in the 2011 list  of the most expensive cities in the world conducted by the Mercer Human Resource
Consulting.[68]  Its Nizami Street  is one of the most expensive streets in the world.

CULTURE
The city has many amenities that offer a wide range of cultural activities, drawing both from a rich local dramatic portfolio and
an international repertoire. It also boasts many museums such as Baku Museum of Modern Art  and Azerbaijan State Museum of History
, most notably featuring historical artifacts and art. Many of the city's cultural sites were celebrated in 2009 when Baku was
designated an Islamic Culture Capital.[69]  Baku was also chosen to host the Eurovision Dance Contest 2010.

Among Baku's prestigious cultural venues are Azerbaijan State Philharmonic Hall, Azerbaijan State Academic Opera and Ballet
Theatre. The main movie theatre  is Azerbaijan Cinema. Festivals include the Baku International Film Festival, Baku International
Jazz Festival, Novruz Festival, Gül Bayramı  (Flower Festival) and the National Theater Festival.[70][71]  International and local
exhibitions are presented at the Baku Expo Center.

As of 2012[update], the city along with Ganja  and Lankaran  participates in Earth Hour  movement.[72][73]

 * Museums in Baku
 * National Museum of History
   
   
 * Nizami Museum of Literature
   
   
 * National Art Museum
   
   
 * Villa Petrolea
   
   
 * Baku Museum of Modern Art
   
   

ARCHITECTURE
Main article: Architecture in Baku
The Maiden Tower  in Old Baku, a UNESCO  World Heritage Site  built in the 11th–12th century, recognized as the symbol of the
city.Baku has wildly varying architecture, ranging from the Old City  core to modern buildings and the spacious layout of the Baku
port. Many of the city's most impressive buildings were built during the early 20th Century, when architectural elements of the
European styles were combined in eclectic  style.[74]  Baku thus has an original and unique appearance, earning it a reputation as
the 'Paris of the East'.[75]

Late modern and postmodern architecture began to appear in the early 2000s. With economic development, old buildings such as
Atlant House were razed to make way for new ones. Buildings with all-glass shells have appeared around the city, the most
prominent examples being the Azerbaijan Tower, Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center, Flame Towers, Baku Crystal Hall, Baku White City 
and SOCAR Tower. These projects also caught the attention of international media as notable programs such as Discovery Channel's 
Extreme Engineering  did pieces focusing in on changes to the city.[76]

The Old City of Baku, also known as the Walled City of Baku, refers to the ancient Baku settlement. Most of the walls and towers,
strengthened after the Russian conquest in 1806, survived. This section is picturesque, with its maze of narrow alleys and ancient
buildings: the cobbled streets past the Palace of the Shirvanshahs, two caravansaries, the baths and the Juma Mosque  (which used
to house the Azerbaijan National Carpet and Arts Museum  but is now a mosque again). The old town core also has dozens of small
mosques, often without any particular sign to distinguish them as such.

In 2003, UNESCO placed the Inner City on the List of World Heritage in Danger, citing damage from a November 2000 earthquake, poor
conservation as well as "dubious" restoration efforts.[77]

MUSIC AND MEDIA
Baku Crystal Hall  during the Eurovision Song Contest 2012The music scene in Baku can be traced back to ancient times and villages
of Baku, generally revered as the fountainhead of meykhana  and mugham  in the Azerbaijan.[78][79]

In recent years, the success of Azerbaijani performers such as AySel, Farid Mammadov, Sabina Babayeva, Safura  and Elnur Hüseynov 
in the Eurovision Song Contest  has significantly boosted the profile of the Baku's music scene, prompting international
attention. Following the victory of Azerbaijan's representative Eldar & Nigar  at the Eurovision Song Contest 2011, Baku hosted
the Eurovision Song Contest 2012.[80][81]

2005 was a landmark in the development of Azerbaijani jazz  in the city. It has been home to legendary jazz musicians like Vagif
Mustafazadeh, Aziza Mustafa Zadeh, Rafig Babayev and Rain Sultanov.[82][83]  Among Baku's prominent annual fairs and festivals is 
Baku International Jazz Festival, which features some of the world's most identifiable jazz names.[84][85]

Baku also has a thriving International Center of Mugham, which is located in Baku Boulevard, Gulustan Palace  and Buta Palace, one
of the principal performing arts centers  and music venues  in the city.[86]

The majority of Azerbaijan's media companies (including television, newspaper and radio, such as ANS, Azad Azerbaijan TV, Ictimai
TV, Lider TV  and Region TV) are headquartered in Baku. The films The World Is Not Enough  and The Diamond Arm  are set in the
city, while Amphibian Man  includes several scenes filmed in Old City.

Out of the city's radio stations ANS ChM, Ictimai Radio, Radio Antenn, Burc FM, and Lider FM Jazz  are some of the more
influential competitors with large national audiences. ANS ChM was one of the first private and independent FM radio  broadcasting
service in the Caucasus  and Central Asia regions when it was established in May 1994.[87]

Some of the most influential Baku newspapers include the daily Azadliq, Zaman  (The Time), Bakinskiy Rabochiy  (The Baku Worker), 
Echo  and the English-language Baku Today.

Baku is also featured in the video game Battlefield 4.[88]

NIGHTLIFE
Baku boasts a vibrant nightlife. Many clubs that are open until dawn can be found throughout the city. Clubs with an eastern
flavor provide special treats from the cuisine of Azerbaijan  along with local music. Western-style clubs target younger, more
energetic crowds.[89]  Most of the public houses  and bars are located near Fountains Square  and are usually open until the early
hours of the morning.

Baku is home to restaurants catering to every cuisine and occasion. Restaurants range from luxurious and expensive to ordinary and
affordable.[90]

In the Lonely Planet  "1000 Ultimate Experiences", Baku placed 8th among the top 10 party cities in the world.[6][91]

PARKS AND GARDENS
Philarmony gardenBaku has large sections of greenery either preserved by the National Government or designated as green zones. The
city, however, continues to lack a green belt development as economic activity pours into the capital, resulting in massive
housing projects along the suburbs.[92]

Baku Boulevard  is a pedestrian promenade that runs parallel to Baku's seafront. The boulevard contains an amusement park, yacht
club, musical fountain, statues and monuments. The park is popular with dog-walkers and joggers, and is convenient for tourists.
It is adjacent to the newly built International Center of Mugham  and the musical fountain.

Other prominent parks and gardens include Heydar Aliyev Park, Samad Vurgun Park, Narimanov Park, Alley of Honor  and the 
Fountains
Square. The Martyrs' Lane, formerly the Kirov Park, is dedicated to the memory of those who lost their lives during the 
Nagorno-Karabakh War  and also to the 137 people killed on Black January.

SPORTS
Heydar Aliyev Sports and Exhibition Complex  during the 2009 Rhythmic Gymnastics European ChampionshipsBaku hosts a Formula One  race through on the Baku City Circuit. The first was the 2016 European Grand Prix.

The city will also host three group games and one quarter-final of the UEFA Euro 2020  European Football Championship.[93]

Since 2002, Baku has hosted 36 major sporting events and selected to host the 2015 European Games.[94]  Baku is also to host the 
fourth edition  of the Islamic Solidarity Games  in 2017.

Baku is also one of world's leading chess centres, having produced famous grandmasters  like Teimour Radjabov, Vugar Gashimov, 
Garry Kasparov, Shahriyar Mammadyarov  and Rauf Mammadov, as well as the arbiter Faik Hasanov. The city also annually hosts the
international tournaments such as Baku Chess Grand Prix, President's Cup, Baku Open and currently bidding to host 42nd Chess
Olympiad  in 2014.[95][96]

First class sporting facilities were built for the indoor games, including the Palace of Hand Games and Heydar Aliyev Sports and
Exhibition Complex. It hosted many sporting events, including FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup, Rhythmic Gymnastics European
Championships  in 2007  and 2009, 2005 World Rhythmic Gymnastics Championships, 2007 FILA Wrestling World Championships  and 2010
European Wrestling Championships, 2011 World Amateur Boxing Championships, 2009 Women's Challenge Cup  and European Taekwondo
Championships  in 2007.[97][98]  Since 2011 the city annually hosts WTA  tennis event called Baku Cup.[99]

The Synergy Baku Cycling Project  participates in the Tour d'Azerbaïdjan  a 2.2 multi-stage bicycle race on the UCI Europe Tour.

Baku made a bid to host the 2016 Summer Olympics  and 2020 Summer Olympics,[100]  but failed to become a Candidate City both
times.[101]

The largest sport hub in the city is Baku Olympic Stadium  with 68,700 seating capacity whose construction was completed in 2015.
The city's three main football clubs are Neftchi Baku, Inter Baku  and FC Baku  of whom first has eight Premier League titles
making Neftchi the most successful Azerbaijani football club. Baku also has several football clubs in the premier and regional
leagues, including AZAL  and Ravan  in Premier League. The city's second largest stadium, Tofiq Bahramov Stadium  hosts a number
of domestic and international competitions and was the main sport centre of the city for a long period until the construction of
Baku Olympic Stadium.

In the Azerbaijan Women's Volleyball Super League, Baku is represented by Rabita Baku, Azerrail Baku, Lokomotiv Baku  and Azeryol
Baku.

TRANSPORT
Baku black cab, introduced in 2011
The car of the Baku Funicular  stationThroughout history the transport system of Baku used the now-defunct horsecars, trams and narrow gauge railways. As of 2011
[update], 1000 black cabs  are ordered by Baku Taxi Company, and as part of a programme originally announced by the Transport
Ministry of Azerbaijan, there is a plan to introduce London cabs into Baku.[102][103]  The move was part of £16 million agreement
between Manganese Bronze  and Baku Taxi Company.[104][105]

Local rail transport includes the Baku Funicular  and the Baku Metro, a rapid-transit system notable for its art, murals, mosaics
and ornate chandeliers. Baku Metro was opened in November 1967 and includes 3 lines and 25 stations at present; 170 million people
used Baku Metro over the past five years.[106]  In 2008, the Chief of the Baku Metro, Taghi Ahmadov, announced plans to construct
41 new stations over the next 17 years. These will serve the new bus complex  as well as the international airport.[107]

Plans are afoot to introduce a single Smart Card for payment on all types of city transport. The metro is now the only form of
transport in Baku to use any type of card-based fare-payment system.[108]

Baku's Central Railway Station is the terminus for national and international rail links to the city. The Kars–Tbilisi–Baku
railway, which will directly connect Turkey, Georgia and Azerbaijan, began to be constructed in 2007 and is scheduled for
completion in 2015.[109]  The completed branch will connect Baku with Tbilisi  in Georgia, and from there trains will continue to 
Akhalkalaki, and Kars  in Turkey.[110]

Baku Yacht ClubSea transport is vital for Baku, as the city is practically surrounded by the Caspian Sea  to the east. Shipping services operate
regularly from Baku across the Caspian Sea to Turkmenbashi  (formerly Krasnovodsk) in Turkmenistan  and to Bandar Anzali  and 
Bandar Nowshar  in Iran.[111]  The commuter ferries, along with the high-speed catamaran Seabus  (Deniz Avtobusu), also form the
main connection between the city and the Absheron peninsula.[112]

The Baku Port was founded in 1902 and since then has been the largest Caspian Sea port. It has six facilities: the main cargo
terminal, the container terminal, the ferry terminal, the oil terminal, the passenger terminal and the port fleet terminal. The
port's throughput capacity reaches 15 million tons  of liquid bulk and up to 10 million tons of dry cargoes.[113]  Beginning in
2010, the Baku International Sea Trade Port  is being reconstructed. The construction will take place in three stages and will be
completed by 2016. The estimated costs are 400 Million US$.[114]  From April to November the Baku Port is accessible to ships
loading cargoes for direct voyages from Western European and Mediterranean ports. The State Road M-1 and the European route E60 
are the two main motorway connections between Europe and Azerbaijan. The motorway network around Baku is well developed and is
constantly being extended. The Heydar Aliyev International Airport  is the only commercial airport serving Baku. The new Baku
Cargo Terminal  was officially opened in March 2005. It was constructed to be a major cargo hub in the CIS  countries and is
actually now one of the biggest and most technically advanced in the region.[115]  There are also several smaller military
airbases  near Baku, such as Baku Kala Air Base, intended for private aircraft, helicopters  and charters.[116]

EDUCATION
See also: List of universities in Baku
Logo of Baku State University, established in 1919 as Azerbaijan's first universityBaku hosts many universities, junior colleges
and vocational schools. Baku State University, the first established university in Azerbaijan was opened in 1919 by the government
of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic. In the early years of the Soviet era, Baku already had Azerbaijan State Oil Academy, 
Azerbaijan Medical University  and Azerbaijan State Economic University. In the post-WWII period, a few more universities were
established such as Azerbaijan Technical University, Azerbaijan University of Languages  and the Azerbaijan Architecture and
Construction University. After 1991 when Azerbaijan gained independence from the Soviet Union, the fall of communism led to the
development of a number of private institutions, including Qafqaz University  and Khazar University  which are currently
considered the most prestigious academic institutions. Apart from the private universities, the government established the 
Academy
of Public Administration, the Azerbaijan Diplomatic Academy  and various military academies. The largest universities according to
the student population are Baku State University and Azerbaijan State Economic University. In addition, there are the Baku Music
Academy  and the Azerbaijan National Conservatoire in Baku established in the early 1920s. Publicly run kindergartens and
elementary schools (years 1 through 11) are operated by local wards or municipal offices.

The Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences, the main state research organization in Azerbaijan is locating in Baku as well.
Moreover, Baku has numerous libraries, many of which contain vast collections of historic documents from the Roman, Byzantine,
Ottoman and Soviet periods, as well as from other civilisations of the past. The most important libraries in terms of historic
document collections include the Nizami Museum of Azerbaijan Literature, the National Library of Azerbaijan, the Mirza Alakbar
Central Library, the Samad Vurgun Library and the Baku Presidential Library.

HEALTH CARE
The city has many public and private hospitals, clinics and laboratories within its bounds and numerous medical research centers.
[117]  Many of these facilities have high technology  equipment, which has contributed to the recent upsurge in "medical tourism"
to Baku, particularly from post-Soviet countries such as Georgia  and Moldova, whose governments send lower-income patients to the
city for inexpensive high-tech medical treatments and operations.

NOTABLE RESIDENTS
Main article: List of people from BakuFor more details on this topic, see Category:People from Baku.Because of its intermittent
periods of great prosperity as well as being the largest city in the Caucasus and one of the most ethnically and culturally
diverse in the Soviet Union, Baku prides itself on having produced a disproportionate number of notable figures in the sciences,
arts and other fields. Some of the houses they resided in display commemorative plaques. Some of the many prestigious residents
include: Academy Award winners Rustam Ibrahimbeyov  and Vladimir Menshov, one of the founders and head of the Soviet space program
 Kerim Kerimov, Nobel Prize winner and physicist Lev Landau  and famous musicians such as Gara Garayev, Uzeyir Hajibeyov, Muslim
Magomayev, Vagif Mustafazadeh  and Alim Qasimov. World-famous cellist Mstislav Rostropovich  was born and raised in Baku, as was
world-famous chess player, Garry Kasparov.

 * Yuli Gusman, Film director and actor, founder and CEO of the prestigious Nika Award.
   
   
 * Gara Garayev, one of Baku's greatest composers.
   
   
 * Physicist  Lev Landau, studied at the Baku State University, won the Nobel Prize in Physics  in 1962.
   
   
 * Hokuma Gurbanova, People’s Artist of the USSR and famous theatre and film actress.
   
   
 * Mikayil Mushfig, Bakuvian poet and victim of the Stalinist purges.
   
   
 * Kerim Kerimov, one of the founders of the Soviet space program.
   
   
 * Tofiq Bahramov  as a Soviet  footballer and football referee  from Azerbaijan.
   
   
 * Vagit Alekperov, President of the leading Russian oil company  LUKOIL.
   
   
 * Muslim Magomayev, one of the most famous singers of USSR.
   
   
 * Mstislav Rostropovich, Grammy Award-winning cellist.
   
   

INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in AzerbaijanTWIN TOWNS AND SISTER CITIES
Baku is twinned  with:[118][119][in chronological  order]

CountryCityState / Province / Region / GovernorateDateSenegalDakarDakar Region1967[118][120][121]ItalyNaplesCampania1972[122]Iraq
BasraBasra Governorate1972[118][120]Bosnia and HerzegovinaSarajevoSarajevo Canton1975[118][120][121]United StatesChristiansted, 
United States Virgin IslandsVirgin Islands1976[118][123]United StatesHoustonTexas1976[118][123]FranceBordeauxAquitaine1979[118]
[120][124]IranTabrizEast Azerbaijan Province1980[118][121]Turkeyİzmirİzmir Province1985[125]VietnamVũng TàuBà Rịa–Vũng Tàu
Province1985[120]United StatesHonolulu CountyHawaii1998[118][126]TurkeySivasSivas Province2000[127]BrazilRio de JaneiroState of  
Rio de Janeiro2013[128]UkraineKievKiev  CityPARTNER CITIES
 * Aberdeen, Scotland
 * Mainz, Germany[118]
 * Stavanger, Norway

Partnership relations also exist at different levels with:[129]  Berlin, Paris, Vienna, Tbilisi, Astana, Minsk, Moscow, Volgograd,
 Kizlyar, Tashkent  and Chengdu.

GALLERY
Nighttime view of Baku * Baku Bay
   
   
 * Old Baku "Icheri Sheher"
   
   
 * Nizami Street
   
   
 * Baku Opera and Ballet Theatre
   
   
 * Ismailiyya building
   
   
 * Maiden Tower
   
   
 * Icheri Sheher
   
   
 * Azerbaijan State Philharmonic Hall
   
   
 * Baku seaside Boulevard
   
   
 * Azerbaijan's Flag
   
   
 * Palace of Happiness
   
   
 * Fountains Square
   
   
 * Rashid Behbudov Street
   
   
 * Aerial view of Baku, May 2012
   
   
 * View of Baku taken from the International Space Station
   
   
 * Panorama Baku, Azerbaijan
   
   
 * Evening Baku, Azerbaijan
   
   
 * A view of the Baku bay
   
   

SEE ALSO
 * Azerbaijan portal

 * Administrative divisions of Azerbaijan
 * Ganja
 * List of cities in Azerbaijan
 * Mingachevir
 * Nakhchivan
 * Sumgait
 * 1920 Baku Congress
 * Ateshgah of Baku

REFERENCES
 1.   ^  "Administrative, density and territorial units and land size by economic regions of Azerbaijan Republic for January 1.
      2007". Archived from the original  on 24 November 2007. Retrieved 17 July  2009.
 2.   ^  Demographia: World Urban Areas  – Demographia, 2016
 3.   ^  The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan, 2.5 Population by sex, economic and administrative
      regions, urban settlements at the beginning of 2012, retrieved on October 2, 2012  Archived  23 October 2012 at the Wayback
      Machine.
 4.   ^  Thomas de Waal  (2010). The Caucasus: An Introduction. Oxford University Press. p. 16. ISBN0199750432.
 5.   ^  "Population by economic and administrative regions, urban settlements at the beginning of the 2009". Archived from the
      original  on 14 November 2009. Retrieved 21 November  2009.
 6.   ^ a  b  "Travel Picks: Top 10 cities to party the night away". Reuters. 13 November 2009. Archived  from the original on 23
      November 2009. Retrieved 21 November  2009.
 7.   ^  "State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic: Transition from National to Transnational Company or Demand of Time?".
      Turkishweekly.net. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original  on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 17 December  2011.
 8.   ^  "Port of Baku". World Port Source. Retrieved 23 December  2010.
 9.   ^ a  b  "Culture & Religion on Podium: Politicizing Linguistics". Web.archive.org. Archived from the original  on 13 October
      2007. Retrieved 25 July  2009.
 10.  ^  Город Баку...  Retrieved on 24 June 2006
 11.  ^  Ancient Observatory of Absheron. Gobustan, No 3 (1973)
 12.  ^  "Azerbaijan – Walled City of Baku with the Shirvanshah's Palace...". Archived from the original  on 2 January 2008.
      Retrieved 14 October  2007.
 13.  ^  "Ичери Шехер": быть или не быть  Retrieved on 25 June 2006 Archived  20 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
 14.  ^  Dumper, Michael; Stanley, Bruce E (2007). Cities of the Middle East and North Africa. ISBN9781576079195. Retrieved 30
      June  2015.
 15.  ^  "Azerbaijan – history – geography". britannica.com.
 16.  ^  Russian Azerbaijan, 1905–1920 By Tadeusz Swietochowski page 272
 17.  ^  Russia and Iran, 1780-1828By Muriel Atkin, Page 16-20
 18.  ^  SHUKIUROV KERIM. "THE CAUCASUS IN THE SYSTEM OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS: THE TURKMANCHAY TREATY WAS SIGNED 180 YEARS AGO"
      . Cyberleninka. Retrieved 30 June  2015.
 19.  ^  Mikaberidze, Alexander (2011). "Treaty of Ganja (1735)". In Mikaberidze, Alexander. Conflict and Conquest in the Islamic
      World: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 329. ISBN1598843362.
 20.  ^  "Relations between Tehran and Moscow, 1797–2014". Retrieved 9 March  2015.
 21.  ^  "The Qajar Dynasty in Iran: The Most Important Occurence Evented in the Qajars Monarchy"  (PDF).
 22.  ^  Mojtahed-Zadeh, Pirouz (2007). Boundary Politics and International Boundaries of Iran: A Study of the Origin, Evolution,
      and Implications of the Boundaries of Modern Iran with Its 15 Neighbors in the Middle East by a Number of Renowned Experts
      in the Field. Universal. p. 372. ISBN1-58112-933-5.
 23.  ^ a  b  "Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia". Retrieved 9 March  2015.
 24.  ^  Witold Zglenicki
 25.  ^  Abraham Valentine Williams Jackson. "From Constantinople to the Home of Omar Khayyam". The Macmillan Company, 1911, p. 25
      . Retrieved 1 December  2011.
 26.  ^  "Window2Baku.com". Window2Baku.com. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 27.  ^  Smith, Michael (April 2001). "Anatomy of Rumor: Murder Scandal, the Musavat Party and Narrative of the Russian Revolution
      in Baku, 1917–1920". Journal of Contemporary History. 36  (2): 228. doi:10.1177/002200940103600202. The results of the March
      events were immediate and total for the Musavat. Several hundreds of its members were killed in the fighting; up to 12,000
      Muslim civilians perished; thousands of others fled Baku in a mass exodus
 28.  ^  Minahan, James B. Miniature Empires: A Historical Dictionary of the Newly Independent States. p. 22. ISBN0-313-30610-9. 
      The tensions and fighting between the Azeris and the Armenians in the federation culminated in the massacre of some 12,000
      Azeris in Baku by radical Armenians and Bolshevik troops in March 1918
 29.  ^  Tadeusz Swietochowski. Russia and Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition. Columbia University Press, 1995. ISBN
      0-231-07068-3, ISBN 978-0-231-07068-3  and Reinhard Schulze. A Modern History of the Islamic World. I.B.Tauris, 2000. ISBN
      1-86064-822-3, ISBN 978-1-86064-822-9.
 30.  ^  Andreopoulos, George (1997). Genocide: Conceptual and Historical Dimensions. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
      Press, ISBN 0-8122-1616-4, p. 236.
 31.  ^  Etienne Forestier-Peyrat, ″Red Passage to Iran: The Baku Trade Fair and the Unmaking of the Azerbaijani Borderland,
      1922–1930″, Ab Imperio, Vol 2013, Issue 4, pp. 79–112.
 32.  ^  "Money from oil changes the face of Azerbaijan". news.az. Retrieved 22 July  2011.
 33.  ^  Tiffany M. Luck (26 February 2008). "The World's Dirtiest Cities". Forbes. Archived  from the original on 2 December 2010
      . Retrieved 17 November  2010.
 34.  ^  "Global ICT Conference: 25–28, November, 2004 : Baku, Azerbaijan". Global-ict.mincom.gov.az. Archived from the original 
      on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 35.  ^  "Window to Baku". Window2baku.com. Archived  from the original on 10 May 2010. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 36.  ^  "World Weather Information Service".
 37.  ^  "Climatological Information for Baku, Azerbaijan"  – Hong Kong Observatory
 38.  ^  "Baku, Azerbaijan". Meoweather. Retrieved 25 February  2013.
 39.  ^  "Baku's History". Bakupages.com. 19 March 2010. Archived  from the original on 2 April 2010. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 40.  ^  "Baku's History". Kishmish.az. Archived from the original  on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 41.  ^  Territories, number, density of population and territorial units by economic and administrative regions of Azerbaijan
      Republic by 1 January 2009  Archived  14 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
 42.  ^  Azerbaijan: The status of Armenians, Russians, Jews and other minorities, report, 1993, INS Resource Informacion Center,
      p.10
 43.  ^  "Azerbaijan – The Soviet and post-Soviet periods". Britannica. Retrieved 17 December  2011.
 44.  ^  "JewishVirtualLibrary.org". JewishVirtualLibrary.org. 10 July 2006. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 45.  ^  (Russian)  Kavkazskii Kalendar na 1852g., pp. 305–307
 46.  ^  (Russian)  Свод статистических данных о населении Закавказского края, извлечённых из посемейных списков 1886 года, г.
      Тифлис, 1893
 47.  ^  (Russian)  Первая всеобщая перепись населения Российской Империи 1897 г. – г. Баку  Archived  19 January 2012 at the 
      Wayback Machine.
 48.  ^ a  b  The Azerbaijani Turks: Power and Identity Under Russian Rule, Audrey L. Altstadt, page 32, Hoover Press, 1992, ISBN
      9780817991838
 49.  ^  (Russian)  Всесоюзная перепись населения 1926 года, т. 14, Закавказская СФСР, г. Москва, 1929
 50.  ^  Soviet 1939 census
 51.  ^  Soviet 1959 census
 52.  ^  Soviet 1970 census
 53.  ^  Soviet 1979 census
 54.  ^  "Ethnic composition of Azerbaijan 1999". Retrieved 30 June  2015.
 55.  ^  "Ethnic composition of Azerbaijan 2009". Retrieved 30 June  2015.
 56.  ^  "Country-data.com". Country-data.com. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 57.  ^  Audrey Altstadt, Conflict, Cleavage, and Change in Central Asia and the Caucasus, Cambridge University Press, 1997, p.
      112, table 4.1, Ethnic composition of Baku, 1897, 1903,1913
 58.  ^  Баку  (in Russian). Archived  from the original on 1 July 2007. Retrieved 15 July  2007.
 59.  ^  Sharifov, Azad. "Legend of the Bibi-Heybat Mosque". Azerbaijan International Magazine. Retrieved 11 July  2010.
 60.  ^  Juan Eduardo Campo,Encyclopedia of Islam, p.625
 61.  ^  "The History of Oil in Azerbaijan by Natig Aliyev". Azer.com. Archived  from the original on 24 April 2009. Retrieved 22
      May  2009.
 62.  ^  Aghazade, Emil (4 July 2005). "Азербайджан: сто лет надежд". BBC News. Retrieved 12 May  2011.
 63.  ^  Abdullayev, Rovshan. "Which foreign banks has Azerbaijan capital been trusted in?". Archived from the original  on 18 May
      2011. Retrieved 6 December  2010.
 64.  ^  "Hotels in Baku earned 6,8 million euros last year". Azerbaijan24.com. Archived from the original  on 17 September 2010.
      Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 65.  ^  "Azerbaijani flag flies on world's tallest flagpole". news.az. Archived  from the original on 4 September 2010. Retrieved
       2 September  2010.
 66.  ^  "İşte dünyanın en yüksek bayrak direği"  (in Turkish). ntvmsnbc.com. Archived from the original  on 4 September 2010.
      Retrieved 2 September  2010.
 67.  ^  "Guinness World Records". guinnessworldrecords.com.
 68.  ^  "Bakı dünyanın ən bahalı 48-ci şəhəridir, 13 July 2011, Azadlıq Radiosu. Retrieved 13 July 2011". Azadliq.org. 13 July
      2011. Retrieved 17 December  2011.
 69.  ^  Azerbaijan Business Center. "Closing ceremony of Cultural Year "Baku- Islamic Culture Capital-2009" conducted in
      Azerbaijan". Archived from the original  on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 5 February  2010.
 70.  ^  В Азербайджане отмечают праздник цветов.  (Russian)  Archived  24 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
 71.  ^  Azerbaycan'da Gül Bayramı ve Aliyev'in doğum günü kutlanıyor  Archived  24 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine. (Turkish)
 72.  ^  "Azerbaijan to join Earth Hour". www.news.az. Archived from the original  on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 17 November 
      2014.
 73.  ^  "IDEA campaign to hold Earth Hour action". en.trend.az. Retrieved 17 November  2014.
 74.  ^  "Baku's Architecture:A Fusion of East and West". Azer.com. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 75.  ^  Архитектурное развитие города  (Russian)
 76.  ^  "Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center And Flame Towers". Discovery Communications. Retrieved 25 April  2011.
 77.  ^  "Walled City of Baku with the Shirvanshah's Palace and Maiden Tower – UNESCO World Heritage Centre". Whc.unesco.org.
      Retrieved 22 May  2009.
 78.  ^  "Meyxana", ya "bədihə" sözü aləmi bir-birinə qatıb  (Azerbaijani)
 79.  ^  QARABAĞ MUĞAM MƏKTƏBİ  (Azerbaijani)
 80.  ^  Cadwalladr, Carole (15 May 2011). "Azerbaijan win Eurovision as Blue and Jedward finish mid-table". The Guardian. London.
       Archived  from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 15 May  2011.
 81.  ^  "Azerbaijan win Eurovision contest with Running Scared". BBC News. Retrieved 8 July  2013.
 82.  ^  "The Emergence of Jazz in Azerbaijan". Azer.com. Archived  from the original on 13 April 2010. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 83.  ^  MediaDesignTech. "History of Jazz in Azerbaijan". Jazz.az. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 84.  ^  "Baku International Jazz Festival has been opened in Azerbaijan". Azerbaijan24.com. Archived from the original  on 11 May
      2010. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 85.  ^  "Baku International Jazz Festival Official Site". Festival.jazz.az. Archived  from the original on 28 March 2010.
      Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 86.  ^  "The Director-General hails the importance of living traditions at the Mugham Festival in Baku, Azerbaijan".
      Portal.unesco.org. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 87.  ^  "Most Popular Azeri Commercial Broadcaster Taken Off Air". UNDP  (via BBC Monitoring Service). 25 November 2006.
      Retrieved 22 November  2008.[dead link]
 88.  ^  "Battlefield 4 a sneaky screen from Baku". xboxplayers.com. Archived from the original  on 13 May 2013. Retrieved 19 May 
      2013.
 89.  ^  "About Baku and Azerbaijan". Thelandmarkhotel.az. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 90.  ^  M. "Food and Restaurants in Azerbaijan and Baku". T-i.ifrance.com. Retrieved 16 June  2011.[permanent dead link]
 91.  ^  Beograd na vrhu liste gradova sa najboljim noćnim provodom  (Serbian)  Archived  15 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
 92.  ^  Экология и охрана окружающей среды в Азербайджане  (Russian)
 93.  ^  "Euro 2020: England might have to play games at Hampden Park". The Independent. Retrieved 30 June  2015.
 94.  ^  "Azerbaijan is a country known for its love of sport and sportsmanship.". www.baku2015.com. Retrieved 27 January  2014.[
      dead link]
 95.  ^  "Azerbaijan bids to host Chess Olympiad". news.az. Archived from the original  on 5 May 2010. Retrieved 16 August  2010.
 96.  ^  "Chess players from 11 countries to join "Baku Open 2010"". today,az. Archived  from the original on 17 August 2010.
      Retrieved 16 August  2010.
 97.  ^  Cev Cup: Final Four femminile a Baku  (Italian)  Archived  22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
 98.  ^  Уралочка, Ямамай и ЦЗ. Добро пожаловать в бакинский ад!  (Russian)
 99.  ^  "2011 WTA Tournament Calendar". WTA. Archived  from the original on 10 November 2010. Retrieved 26 November  2010.
 100. ^  "Azerbaijan bids for 2020 Olympics in Baku – Olympics – ESPN". ESPN. 1 September 2011. Retrieved 15 September  2011.
 101. ^  "Olympic News - Official Source of Olympic News - Olympic.org". Retrieved 30 June  2015.
 102. ^  Meidment, Neil (3 March 2011). "Manganese Bronze seals biggest London taxi order". Reuters. Retrieved 4 March  2011.
 103. ^  Jaglom, Ben. "Manganese takes black cab to Azerbaijan". Retrieved 4 March  2011.
 104. ^  "1,000 London taxis for Azerbaijan". Retrieved 4 March  2011.
 105. ^  "British firm wins £16m Azerbaijan order for its Chinese built taxis". Retrieved 4 March  2011.
 106. ^  "Baku Metro Chief: "Baku-Sumgait metro line is not planned"". En.apa.az. Archived from the original  on 20 January 2012.
      Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 107. ^  "41 new underground stations to be constructed in Azerbaijani capital in the next 17 years". Today.az. 10 October 2008.
      Retrieved 14 August  2009.
 108. ^  "Azerbaijan Business Center – Azerbaijan to introduce a single payment card for public transport". Abc.az. 2011-12-29.
      Retrieved 2013-03-12.[permanent dead link]
 109. ^  "Azerbaijani FM: Baku-Tbilisi-Kars railroad to be built in 2012". trend.az. Retrieved 26 January  2011.
 110. ^  Railway Gazette International  February 2009 p54 with map
 111. ^  "Baku Sea Port expects for passenger trip Anzali-Baku". En.trend.az. 18 February 2010. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 112. ^  "Ferry Service across Caspian sea". Azerbaijan24.com. Archived from the original  on 29 March 2010. Retrieved 17 April 
      2010.
 113. ^  "Baku Sea Port". Bakuseaport.az. Archived  from the original on 16 April 2008. Retrieved 7 March  2008.
 114. ^  "Azerbaijan, Baku". m-hesse.com. Retrieved 1 February  2011.
 115. ^  "Heydar Aliyev International Airport (BAK/UBBB), Baku, Azerbaijan". Airport-technology.com. Archived  from the original
      on 12 March 2010. Retrieved 17 April  2010.[unreliable source?]
 116. ^  Fevralın 14-ü Azərbaycan Hərbi Hava Qüvvələrinin (HHQ) yaranma günüdür  (Azerbaijani)  Archived  6 July 2011 at the 
      Wayback Machine.
 117. ^  "Azerbaijan: Energy-Rich, Healthcare-Poor". Eurasianet.org. Retrieved 25 April  2011.
 118. ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  i  j  "Twin-cities of Azerbaijan". Azerbaijans.com. Retrieved 2013-08-09.
 119. ^  "The main directions of foreign relations of the executive authorities of Baku". Archived  from the original on 14 July
      2007. Retrieved 15 July  2007.
 120. ^ a  b  c  d  e  Musa Gasymly (2005). "АЗЕРБАЙДЖАН В МЕЖДУНАРОДНЫХ КУЛЬТУРНЫХ СВЯЗЯХ(1946–1990 гг.)" [Azerbaijan's cultural
      affairs (1946–1990)]. Tbilisi: Artanuchi. Retrieved 4 February  2010.
 121. ^ a  b  c  "ВСЕ ОСТАЕТСЯ ЛЮДЯМ" [Everything remains for people]. 29  (19725). Vyshka. 25 July 2008. Retrieved 4 February 
      2010.
 122. ^  Flexibe Solutions (26 October 2007). "Embassy of Azerbaijan Republic in Italy". Azembassy.it. Archived from the original 
      on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 17 April  2010.
 123. ^ a  b  Maud Beck (Winter 2006). "Sister Cities: Baku and Houston. Celebrating 30 Years as Sister Cities". Azerbaijan
      International: 68–71. Archived  from the original on 2 February 2010. Retrieved 4 February  2010.
 124. ^  "Bordeaux-Atlas français de la coopération décentralisée et des autres actions extérieures". Délégation pour l’Action
      Extérieure des Collectivités Territoriales (Ministère des Affaires étrangères)  (in French). Archived from the original  on
      7 February 2013. Retrieved 2013-07-29.
 125. ^  "İzmir Metropolitan Municipality". Izmir.bel.tr. Retrieved 17 April  2010.[dead link]
 126. ^  "International Relations". Archived from the original  on 28 June 2012. Retrieved 2013-07-08.
 127. ^  Uzaklar Yakinlaşti – Sivas Twin Towns  Archived  27 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine.(Turkish)
 128. ^  "Баку и Рио-де-Жанейро стали городами-побратимами – 1NEWS.AZ". archive.org. 7 December 2013. Archived from the original
      on 7 December 2013.  CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
 129. ^  "Executive Power of the Baku City"  (in Russian). Azerbaijan.az. Retrieved 8 April  2008.

EXTERNAL LINKS
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Baku.Wikisource  has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica  article Baku (town).
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Baku. * UNESCO/ICOMOS (29 April 2003). "Joint UNESCO-ICOMOS Mission to the Walled City of Baku"  (PDF). UNESCO/ICOMOS.
 * Baku's profile at the Organization of World Heritage Cities website
 * UNESCO World Heritage Site listing Walled City of Baku
 * Photos of Baku
 * Trip To Azerbaijan

Articles related to BakuPreceded by
Alexandria, Djibouti, LahoreCapital of Islamic Culture
2009Succeeded by
Tarim * v
 * t
 * e

Administrative divisions of AzerbaijanDistricts (Raions) * Absheron
 * Agdam
 * Agdash
 * Aghjabadi
 * Agstafa
 * Agsu
 * Astara
 * Babek
 * Balakan
 * Barda
 * Beylagan
 * Bilasuvar
 * Dashkasan
 * Fizuli
 * Gadabay
 * Goranboy
 * Goychay
 * Goygol
 * Hajigabul
 * Imishli
 * Ismailli
 * Jabrayil
 * Jalilabad
 * Julfa
 * Kalbajar
 * Kangarli
 * Khachmaz
 * Khizi
 * Khojaly
 * Khojavend
 * Kurdamir
 * Lachin
 * Lankaran
 * Lerik
 * Masally
 * Neftchala
 * Oghuz
 * Ordubad
 * Qabala
 * Qakh
 * Qazakh
 * Gobustan
 * Quba
 * Qubadli
 * Qusar
 * Saatly
 * Sabirabad
 * Sadarak
 * Salyan
 * Samukh
 * Shabran
 * Shakhbuz
 * Shaki
 * Shamakhi
 * Shamkir
 * Sharur
 * Shusha
 * Siazan
 * Tartar
 * Tovuz
 * Ujar
 * Yardymli
 * Yevlakh
 * Zangilan
 * Zaqatala
 * Zardab

Cities * Baku
 * Ganja
 * Khankendi
 * Lankaran
 * Mingachevir
 * Naftalan
 * Nakhchivan City
 * Shaki
 * Shirvan
 * Sumqayit
 * Shusha
 * Yevlakh

Towns * Agdam
 * Agdash
 * Aghjabadi
 * Aghstafa
 * Agsu
 * Astara
 * Babek
 * Balakan
 * Barda
 * Beylagan
 * Bilasuvar
 * Dashkasan
 * Füzuli
 * Gadabay
 * Goranboy
 * Goychay
 * Goygol
 * Hajiqabul
 * Imishli
 * Ismayilly
 * Jabrayil
 * Jalilabad
 * Julfa
 * Kalbajar
 * Khachmaz
 * Khizi
 * Khojavend
 * Khojaly
 * Khirdalan
 * Kurdamir
 * Lachin
 * Lerik
 * Masally
 * Neftchala
 * Oghuz
 * Ordubad
 * Gabala
 * Qakh
 * Gazakh
 * Gobustan
 * Quba
 * Qubadli
 * Qusar
 * Saatly
 * Sabirabad
 * Salyan
 * Shabran
 * Shahbuz
 * Shamakhi
 * Shamkir
 * Sharur
 * Siyazan
 * Tartar
 * Tovuz
 * Ujar
 * Yardymly
 * Zəngilan
 * Zaqatala
 * Zardab

Names in italics  indicate parts of the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic * v
 * t
 * e

Baku * Architecture
 * History  (Timeline)

Raions of Baku * Xəzər
 * Binəqədi
 * Qaradağ
 * Xətai
 * Nərimanov
 * Nəsimi
 * Nizami
 * Pirallahy
 * Sabail
 * Sabunçu
 * Suraxanı
 * Yasamal

Settlements and Towns * Artyom
 * Badamdar
 * Bayil
 * Bakıxanov
 * Balaxanı
 * Baş Ələt
 * Bibiheybət
 * Biləcəri
 * Bilgəh
 * Binə
 * Bukhta-Ilicha
 * Bülbülə
 * Buzovna
 * Cənubi
 * Çeyildağ
 * Chërnyy Gorod
 * Çilov
 * Çilov-Neft Daşları
 * Dənizkənarı
 * Dübəndi
 * Dzhabar
 * Əhmədli
 * Ələt
 * Əmircan
 * Gürgan
 * Gürgən-Pirallahı
 * Heybət
 * Hövsan
 * İkinci Qala
 * Kələzağ
 * Keşlə
 * Korgöz
 * Kotal
 * Kürdəxanı
 * Lökbatan
 * Maştağa
 * Mərdəkan
 * Müşfiqabad
 * Nardaran
 * Neft Daşları
 * Pirallahı
 * Pirsaat
 * Pirşağı
 * Puta
 * Qala
 * Qaraçuxur
 * Qaraibad
 * Qarakosa
 * Qaya
 * Qızıldaş
 * Qobustan
 * Qoşaqışlaq
 * Ramana
 * Rəsulzadə
 * Sabunçu
 * Şağan
 * Sahil
 * Şahqaya
 * Sanqaçal
 * Şıxlar
 * Şonqar
 * Şubanı
 * Sulutəpə
 * Şüvəlan
 * Türkan
 * Üçtəpə
 * Xanlar
 * Xocəsən
 * Yeni Ələt
 * Yeni Günəşli
 * Yeni Suraxanı
 * Zabrat
 * Zəfəran
 * Zağulba Bağları
 * Zığ
 * Zirə

Landmarks * See template

 * v
 * t
 * e

Baku  landmarksFamous and historic structures * Ichari Shahar
 * Palace of the Shirvanshahs
 * Bath Houses of the Shirvanshahs
 * Bath Houses of Haji Gayib
 * Maiden Tower
 * Baku Khans' Palace
 * Alley of Honor
 * Martyrs' Lane
 * Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center
 * International Mugam Center of Azerbaijan
 * Palace of Happiness
 * Gulustan Palace
 * Ismailiyya Palace
 * Sovetsky
 * Baku TV Tower
 * Flame Towers

Places of worship * Bibi-Heybat Mosque
 * Binagady Mosque
 * Gardashlyg Mosque
 * Juma Mosque
 * Lezgi Mosque
 * Muhammad Mosque
 * Palace Mosque
 * Saray Mosque
 * Shahids’ Mosque
 * Sheikh İbrahim Mosque
 * Taza Pir Mosque
 * Tuba Shahi Mosque
 * Ateshgah
 * Holy Myrrhbearers Cathedral
 * Church of the Saviour
 * Church of Michael Archangel
 * Church of the Immaculate Conception

Nature and parks * Baku Bay
 * Baku Archipelago
 * Lake Boyukshor
 * Baku Botanical Gardens
 * National Park
 * Mirza Alakbar Sabir Garden
 * Philharmonic Garden
 * Molokan Garden
 * Baku Boulevard
 * Samad Vurgun Park

Entertainment and recreation * Baku Crystal Hall
 * Baku Ferris Wheel
 * Buta Palace
 * Heydar Aliyev Palace
 * Baku Zoo
 * Park Bulvar
 * Children's World
 * Baku State Circus
 * Baku Water Park
 * Baku Aqua Park

Cultural and art * National Library of Azerbaijan
 * Azerbaijan State Academic Opera and Ballet Theater
 * Azerbaijan State Philharmonic Hall
 * National Art Museum of Azerbaijan
 * Azerbaijan State Museum of History
 * Independence Museum of Azerbaijan
 * Azerbaijan State Museum of Musical Culture
 * Nizami Museum of Azerbaijani Literature
 * Baku Museum of Modern Art
 * Baku Museum of Miniature Books
 * Rinay
 * Azerbaijan Carpet Museum
 * House-Museum of Vagif Mustafazadeh
 * Villa Petrolea
 * Azerbaijan State Academic Drama Theatre
 * Azerbaijan State Pantomime Theatre
 * Azerbaijan State Russian Drama Theatre
 * Azerbaijan State Theatre of Musical Comedy
 * Azerbaijan State Theatre of Young Spectators
 * Baku Puppet Theatre
 * Green Theatre
 * Rashid Behbudov State Song Theatre

Science and education * Baku State University
 * Azerbaijan Technical University
 * Azerbaijan Medical University
 * Azerbaijan State Economic University
 * Azerbaijan State University of Culture and Arts
 * Azerbaijan University of Languages
 * Azerbaijan Architecture and Construction University
 * Khazar University
 * Qafqaz University
 * Baku Slavic University
 * Odlar Yurdu University
 * Western University
 * Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences
 * Azerbaijan State Marine Academy
 * Azerbaijan State Oil Academy
 * Baku Academy of Music
 * Asaf Zeynally Music College
 * Baku Polytechnicum
 * Jamshid Nakhchivanski Military Lyceum
 *   Lycée français de Bakou
 * Baku International School

Sport venues * AZAL Stadium
 * Baku Aquatics Center
 * Baku National Stadium
 * Baku Shooting Center
 * Baku Sports Hall
 * Baku Tennis Academy
 * Bayil Stadium
 * Dalga Arena
 * Bakcell Arena
 * Heydar Aliyev Sports and Exhibition Complex
 * Ismat Gayibov Stadium
 * Karabakh Stadium
 * National Gymnastics Arena
 * Inter Arena
 * Shagan Olympic Sport Complex Stadium
 * Tofiq Bahramov Stadium
 * Tofiq Ismayilov Stadium

Transportation * Heydar Aliyev International Airport
 * Baku Railway Station
 * Baku International Sea Trade Port
 * Baku Metro
 * Baku Funicular

Squares and streets * Azadliq Square
 * Fountains Square
 * National Flag Square
 * 28 May Street
 * Boyuk Shor Highway
 * Istiglaliyyat Street
 * Neftchilar Avenue
 * Nizami Street
 * Rashid Behbudov Street
 * Tbilisi Avenue

Government and
financial institutions * National Assembly
 * Government House
 * Presidential Apparatus
 * Baku City Hall
 * Central Bank of Azerbaijan
 * Baku Stock Exchange
 * Baku Expo Center

Category:Baku * v
 * t
 * e

Capitals  of AsiaDependent territories  and states with limited recognition  are in italicsNorth and Central AsiaSouth Asia
Southeast AsiaWest and Southwest Asia * Ashgabat, Turkmenistan
 * Astana, Kazakhstan*
 * Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
 * Dushanbe, Tajikistan
 * Moscow, Russia*
 * Tashkent, Uzbekistan

East Asia * Beijing, People's Republic of China
 * Hong Kong, Hong Kong  (PRC)
 * Macau, Macau  (PRC)
 * Nanjing, Republic of China+
 * Pyongyang, North Korea
 * Seoul, South Korea
 * Taipei, Taiwan  (ROC)+
 * Tokyo, Japan
 * Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia

 * Kabul, Afghanistan
 * Dhaka, Bangladesh
 * Diego Garcia, BIOT  (UK)
 * Islamabad, Pakistan
 * Kathmandu, Nepal
 * Kotte, Sri Lanka
 * Malé, Maldives
 * New Delhi, India
 * Thimphu, Bhutan

 * Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei
 * Bangkok, Thailand
 * Dili, East Timor
 * Flying Fish Cove, Christmas Island  (Australia)
 * Hanoi, Vietnam
 * Jakarta, Indonesia*
 * Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
 * Manila, Philippines
 * Naypyidaw, Myanmar
 * Phnom Penh, Cambodia
 * Singapore
 * Vientiane, Laos
 * West Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands  (Australia)

 * Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
 * Amman, Jordan
 * Ankara, Turkey*
 * Baghdad, Iraq
 * Baku, Azerbaijan*
 * Beirut, Lebanon
 * Cairo, Egypt*
 * Damascus, Syria
 * Doha, Qatar
 * Episkopi, Akrotiri and Dhekelia  (UK)
 * Jerusalem, Israel  (de facto) †
 * Kuwait City, Kuwait
 * Manama, Bahrain

 * Muscat, Oman
 * Nicosia, Cyprus*
 * North Nicosia, Northern Cyprus*
 * Ramallah, Palestine  (de facto) †
 * Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
 * Sana'a, Yemen
 * Stepanakert, Nagorno-Karabakh*
 * Sukhumi, Abkhazia*
 * Tbilisi, Georgia*
 * Tehran, Iran
 * Tskhinvali, South Ossetia*
 * Yerevan, Armenia*

*Transcontinental country.
†  See: Positions on Jerusalem. Both Israel and Palestinians claim Jerusalem as capital. Jerusalem  contains the Israeli
parliament and almost all Israeli government ministries. Tel Aviv  contains most foreign embassies in Israel; Ramallah  is the
administrative seat of the Palestinian Authority.
+  According to the 1947 Constitution of the Republic of China, Nanjing is the official capital of the ROC, with Taipei as the 
seat of government. See also Political status of Taiwan. * v
 * t
 * e

Capitals  of European  states and territoriesCapitals of dependent territories  and states whose sovereignty is disputed  shown in
 italics.Western * Amsterdam,Netherlands1
 * Andorra la Vella,Andorra
 * Bern,Switzerland
 * Brussels,Belgium2
 * Douglas,Isle of Man (UK)
 * Dublin,Ireland
 * London,United Kingdom
 * Luxembourg,Luxembourg
 * Paris,France
 * Saint Helier,Jersey (UK)
 * Saint Peter Port,Guernsey (UK)

Northern * Copenhagen,Denmark
 * Helsinki,Finland
 * Longyearbyen,Svalbard (Norway)
 * Mariehamn,Åland Islands (Finland)
 * Nuuk,Greenland (Denmark)
 * Olonkinbyen,Jan Mayen (Norway)
 * Oslo,Norway
 * Reykjavík,Iceland
 * Stockholm,Sweden
 * Tórshavn,Faroe Islands (Denmark)

Central * Berlin,Germany
 * Bratislava,Slovakia
 * Budapest,Hungary
 * Ljubljana,Slovenia
 * Prague,Czech Republic
 * Vaduz,Liechtenstein
 * Vienna,Austria
 * Warsaw,Poland

Southern * Ankara,Turkey3
 * Athens,Greece
 * Belgrade,Serbia
 * Bucharest,Romania
 * Gibraltar,Gibraltar (UK)
 * Lisbon,Portugal
 * Madrid,Spain
 * Monaco, Monaco
 * Nicosia,Cyprus4
 * North Nicosia,Northern Cyprus4, 5
 * Podgorica,Montenegro
 * Pristina,Kosovo5
 * Rome,Italy
 * San Marino, San Marino
 * Sarajevo,Bosnia and Herzegovina
 * Skopje,Macedonia
 * Sofia,Bulgaria
 * Tirana,Albania
 * Valletta,Malta
 * Vatican City, Vatican City
 * Zagreb,Croatia

Eastern * Astana,Kazakhstan3
 * Baku,Azerbaijan3
 * Chișinău,Moldova
 * Kiev,Ukraine
 * Minsk,Belarus
 * Moscow,Russia3
 * Riga,Latvia
 * Stepanakert,Nagorno-Karabakh4, 5
 * Sukhumi,Abkhazia3, 5
 * Tallinn,Estonia
 * Tbilisi,Georgia3
 * Tiraspol,Transnistria5
 * Tskhinvali,South Ossetia3, 5
 * Vilnius,Lithuania
 * Yerevan,Armenia4

 * 1 Also the capital of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
 * 2 Also the seat of the European Union, see Institutional seats of the European Union  and Brussels and the European Union
 * 3Transcontinental country
 * 4 Entirely in Southwest Asia  but having socio-political connections with Europe
 * 5Partially recognised country

 * v
 * t
 * e

Eurovision Song Contest * History
 * Languages
 * Presenters
 * Rules
 * Voting
 * Winners
 * Winners discography
 * Host cities

CountriesActive * Albania
 * Armenia
 * Australia
 * Austria
 * Azerbaijan
 * Belarus
 * Belgium
 * Bulgaria
 * Croatia
 * Cyprus
 * Czech Republic
 * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * France
 * Georgia
 * Germany
 * Greece
 * Hungary
 * Iceland
 * Ireland
 * Israel
 * Italy
 * Latvia
 * Lithuania
 * Macedonia
 * Malta
 * Moldova
 * Montenegro
 * Netherlands
 * Norway
 * Poland
 * Portugal
 * Romania
 * Russia
 * San Marino
 * Serbia
 * Slovenia
 * Spain
 * Sweden
 * Switzerland
 * Ukraine
 * United Kingdom

Inactive * Andorra
 * Bosnia and Herzegovina
 * Luxembourg
 * Monaco
 * Morocco
 * Slovakia
 * Turkey

Former and unsuccessful * Lebanon
 * Serbia and Montenegro
 * Yugoslavia

Contests * 1956
 * 1957
 * 1958
 * 1959
 * 1960
 * 1961
 * 1962
 * 1963
 * 1964
 * 1965
 * 1966
 * 1967
 * 1968
 * 1969
 * 1970
 * 1971
 * 1972
 * 1973
 * 1974
 * 1975
 * 1976
 * 1977
 * 1978
 * 1979
 * 1980
 * 1981
 * 1982
 * 1983
 * 1984
 * 1985
 * 1986
 * 1987
 * 1988
 * 1989
 * 1990
 * 1991
 * 1992
 * 1993
 * 1994
 * 1995
 * 1996
 * 1997
 * 1998
 * 1999
 * 2000
 * 2001
 * 2002
 * 2003
 * 2004
 * 2005
 * 2006
 * 2007
 * 2008
 * 2009
 * 2010
 * 2011
 * 2012
 * 2013
 * 2014
 * 2015
 * 2016
 * 2017

National selectionsCurrent * Albania
 * Austria
 * Azerbaijan
 * Belarus
 * Belgium
 * Bulgaria
 * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * Germany
 * Greece
 * Hungary
 * Iceland
 * Ireland
 * Israel
 * Italy
 * Latvia
 * Lithuania
 * Macedonia
 * Malta
 * Moldova
 * Netherlands
 * Norway
 * Poland
 * Portugal
 * Romania
 * Slovenia
 * Spain
 * Sweden
 * Switzerland
 * United Kingdom

Former * Bosnia & Herzegovina
 * Croatia
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * Greece
 * Ireland
 * Latvia * Eirodziesma
    * Dziesma
   
   
 * Montenegro
 * Serbia
 * Serbia and Montenegro
 * Switzerland
 * Yugoslavia

Other awards * Marcel Bezençon Awards
 * OGAE * OGAE Video Contest
    * OGAE Second Chance Contest
   
   

Television and concerts * Eurovision Song Contest Previews
 * Songs of Europe
 * Kvalifikacija za Millstreet
 * Congratulations: 50 Years of the Eurovision Song Contest
 * Best of Eurovision
 * Eurovision Song Contest's Greatest Hits

 *   Category
 *   Portal

 * v
 * t
 * e

World Heritage Sites  in Azerbaijan * Gobustan National Park
 * Walled City of Baku * Shirvanshah's Palace
    * Maiden Tower
   
   

Sites on the Tentative List

 * Baku Stage Mountain
 * Binegadi 4th Period Fauna and Flora Deposit
 * Lok-Batan Mud Cone
 * Hyrkan State Reserve
 * Ordubad  historical and architectural reserve
 * Shaki, the Khan's Palace
 * Surakhany, Atashgyakh (Fire - worshippers, temple - museum at Surakhany)
 * Susha  historical and architectural reserve
 * The Caspian Shore Defensive Constructions
 * The mausoleums of Nakhchivan

Authority control * WorldCat Identities
 * VIAF: 122420271
 * LCCN: n79110308
 * GND: 4080246-2