This article is about the country in Eurasia. For other uses, see Azerbaijan (disambiguation).Republic of Azerbaijan
Azərbaycan Respublikası(Azerbaijani)FlagEmblemAnthem: * Azərbaycan marşı
 * "March of Azerbaijan"
 * 

Location of Azerbaijan (green) and Nagorno Karabakh  (light green).CapitalBaku
40°25′N 49°50′E﻿ /40.417°N 49.833°E﻿ / 40.417; 49.833Official languagesAzerbaijaniDemonymAzerbaijaniGovernmentUnitary  
dominant-party  semi-presidential  republic •PresidentIlham Aliyev •Prime MinisterArtur RasizadeLegislatureNational Assembly
Formation •Democratic Republic28 May 1918 •Soviet Socialist Republic28 April 1920 •Independence from
the Soviet Union30 August 1991 (declared)
18 October 1991 (independence)
25 December 1991 (completed) •Constitution  adopted12 November 1995Area •Total86,600 km2  (114th)
33,436 sq mi •Water (%)1.6Population •2016 estimate9,754,830[1]  (89th) •Density11.6/km2  (103rd)
291.7/sq miGDP (PPP)2015 estimate •Total$168.4 billion[2] •Per capita$17,500[2]GDP (nominal)2015 estimate •Total$63.983 billion[2]
 •Per capita$6,794[2]Gini (2008)33.7[3]
mediumHDI  (2013)0.751[4]
high·  76thCurrencyManat  (₼) (AZN)Time zoneAZT  (UTC+04)Drives on therightCalling code+994ISO 3166 codeAZInternet TLD.aza.The
Nagorno-Karabakh Republic is an unrecognised  de facto  sovereign state, widely considered de jure  part of Azerbaijan.Azerbaijan  (i/ˌæzərbaɪˈdʒɑːn/  AZ-ər-by-JAHN; Azerbaijani: Azərbaycan), officially the Republic of Azerbaijan  (Azerbaijani: 
Azərbaycan Respublikası), is a country in the South Caucasus  region, situated at the crossroads of Southwest Asia and
Southeastern Europe.[5]  It is bounded by the Caspian Sea  to the east, Russia  to the north, Georgia  to the northwest, Armenia 
to the west and Iran  to the south. The exclave  of Nakhchivan  is bounded by Armenia to the north and east, Iran to the south and
west, while having a short border with Turkey in the north west.

The Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  proclaimed its independence in 1918. The country was incorporated into the Soviet Union in
1920 as the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic.[6][7]  The modern Republic of Azerbaijan proclaimed its independence on 30
August 1991,[8]  prior to the official dissolution of the USSR  in December 1991. In September 1991, the Armenian majority of the
disputed Nagorno-Karabakh  region seceded to form the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.[9]  The region and seven adjacent districts
outside it  became de facto  independent with the end of the Nagorno-Karabakh War  in 1994. These regions are internationally
recognized as part of Azerbaijan pending a solution to the status of the Nagorno-Karabakh, found through negotiations facilitated
by the OSCE.[10][11][12][13]

Azerbaijan is a unitary semi-presidential  republic. The country is a member state of the Council of Europe, the OSCE  and the 
NATO  Partnership for Peace  (PfP) program. It is one of six independent Turkic states, an active member of the Turkic Council 
and the TÜRKSOY  community. Azerbaijan has diplomatic relations with 158 countries and holds membership in 38 international
organizations.[14]  It is one of the founding members of GUAM, the Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS)[15]  and the 
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. A member of the United Nations since 1992, Azerbaijan was elected to
membership in the newly established Human Rights Council  by the United Nations General Assembly  on 9 May 2006. Its term of
office began on 19 June 2006.[16]  Azerbaijan is also a member state of the Non-Aligned Movement, holds observer status in World
Trade Organization  and is a correspondent at the International Telecommunication Union.[14][17]

The Constitution of Azerbaijan  does not declare an official religion and all major political forces in the country are secularist
. However, the majority of the population consists of Shiite Muslims.[18]  Azerbaijan has a high level of human development  which
ranks on par with most Eastern European countries.[19]  It has a high rate of economic development[20]  and literacy,[21]  as well
as a low rate of unemployment.[22]

However, corruption in Azerbaijan is widespread, especially in the public service.[23][24]  The ruling party, the New Azerbaijan
Party, has been accused of authoritarianism and human rights abuses.[25][26]



ETYMOLOGY
Azerbaijan and its main citiesAccording to a modern etymology, the name of Azerbaijan derives from that of Atropates,[27][28]  a Persian[29][30][31]  satrap 
under the Achaemenid Empire, who was later reinstated as the satrap of Media  under Alexander the Great.[32][33]  The original
etymology of this name is thought to have its roots in the once-dominant Zoroastrian  religion. In the Avesta, Frawardin Yasht 
("Hymn to the Guardian Angels"), there is a mention of âterepâtahe ashaonô fravashîm ýazamaide, which literally translates from 
Avestan  as "we worship the Fravashi  of the holy Atropatene."[34]

Atropates  ruled over the region of Atropatene  (present Iranian Azerbaijan). The name "Atropates" itself is the Greek
transliteration of an Old Iranian, probably Median, compounded name with the meaning "Protected by the (Holy) Fire" or "The Land
of the (Holy) Fire".[35]  The Greek name was mentioned by Diodorus Siculus  and Strabo. Over the span of millennia the name
evolved to Āturpātākān  (Middle Iranian) then to Ādharbādhagān, Ādharbāyagān, Āzarbāydjān  (New Persian) and present-day 
Azerbaijan. Ultimately, the name Azerbaijan  comes from Azar-Payegan. This word is translatable as Guardian of Fire, "The
Treasury" and "The Treasurer" of fire  or "The Land of Fire"[35]  in Modern Persian.[36]  The name was changed to Azerbaijan 
following the Arab conquest in the 7th century AD; Arabic  lacked the letters G  and P, so Arabic speakers modified the spelling
of Azer-payegan.

In 1918, the Musavat government  adopted the name "Azerbaijan" for the newly established Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, which was
proclaimed on 27 May 1918,[37]  for political reasons,[38][39]  even though the name of "Azerbaijan" had always been used to refer
to the adjacent region of contemporary northwestern Iran.[40][41][42]  Thus, until 1918, when the Musavat regime decided to name
the newly independent state Azerbaijan, this designation had been used exclusively to identify the Iranian province of Azerbaijan.

[41][42][43]

HISTORY
Main article: History of AzerbaijanANTIQUITY
Further information: Atropatene  and Caucasian AlbaniaPetroglyphs  in Gobustan  dating back to 10,000 BC indicating a thriving
culture. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site  considered to be of "outstanding universal value".The earliest evidence of human
settlement in the territory of Azerbaijan dates back to the late Stone Age  and is related to the Guruchay culture  of the Azykh
Cave.[44]  The Upper Paleolithic  and late Bronze Age  cultures are attested in the caves of Tağılar, Damcılı, Zar, Yataq-yeri and
in the necropolises  of Leylatepe and Saraytepe.

Early settlements included the Scythians  in the 9th century BC.[35]  Following the Scythians, Iranian Medes  came to dominate the
area to the south of the Aras.[33]  The Medes forged a vast empire between 900–700 BC, which was integrated into the Achaemenid
Empire  around 550 BC. The area was conquered by the Achaemenids leading to the spread of Zoroastrianism.[45]  Later it became
part of Alexander the Great's Empire  and its successor, the Seleucid Empire. During this period, Zoroastrianism spread in the
Caucasus and Atropatene. Caucasian Albanians, the original inhabitants of northeastern Azerbaijan, ruled that area from around the
4th century BC, and established an independent kingdom.

In the 4th and 3rd centuries BC, following the overthrow of the Achaemenid Empire, the southwestern part of modern Azerbaijan was
part of the Kingdom of Armenia ruled by the Orontid Dynasty; between the years 189 BC and 428 AD the western half of modern
Azerbaijan, including the exclave of Nakhchivan, were included into the Kingdom of Greater Armenia  ruled by Armenia's Artaxiad 
and Arsacid  dynasties,[46][47]  the latter itself a branch of the eponymous Arsacid dynasty of Parthia.

After the partition of the Kingdom of Armenia  by Iran  and Byzantium  in 387 AD, the provinces of Artsakh  and Utik, which had an
ethnically mixed population, passed to Caucasian Albania.[48][49]

FEUDAL ERA
The Maiden Tower  and The Palace of the Shirvanshahs  in Old Baku  is a UNESCO World Heritage Site built in the 11th–12th century.
The Iranian Sassanids  turned Caucasian Albania into a vassal state  in AD 252, while King Urnayr  officially adopted Christianity
as the state religion in the 4th century. Despite Sassanid rule, Albania remained an entity in the region until the 9th century,
while fully subordinate to Sassanid Iran, and retained its monarchy.[32]

In the first half of the 7th century AD, the Islamic Umayyad Caliphate  repulsed both the Sassanids and Byzantines from the
Caucasus and turned Caucasian Albania into a vassal state after Christian resistance, led by King Javanshir, was suppressed in 667
AD. Caucasian Albania however, had already come under nominal Muslim rule through the Muslim conquest of Iran, as it was part of
the Sassanid territory upon advent of the Muslim conquest. The power vacuum left by the decline of the Abbasid Caliphate  was
filled by numerous local dynasties such as the Sallarids, Sajids, Shaddadids, Rawadids  and Buyids. At the beginning of the 11th
century, the territory was gradually seized by waves of Turkic  Oghuz  tribes from Central Asia. The first of these Turkic
dynasties established was the Seljuqs, who entered the area now known as Azerbaijan by 1067.

The pre-Turkic population that lived on the territory of modern Azerbaijani Republic spoke several Indo-European and Caucasian
languages, among them Armenian[50][51]  [52][53][54]  and an Iranian language  called the Old Azari language, which was gradually
replaced by a Turkic language, the early precursor of the Azerbaijani language  of today.[55]  To distinguish it from the Turkic
Azerbaijani or Azeri language, this Iranian language, is designated as the Azari language (or Old Azari language), because the
Turkic language and people are also designated as "Azarbaijani" or "Azari" in the Persian language. However some linguists have
also designated the Tati dialects  of Iranian Azerbaijan  and the Republic of Azerbaijan, like those spoken by the Tats, as a
remnant of Azari.[56][57]  Locally, the possessions of the subsequent Seljuq Empire  were ruled by Atabegs, technically vassals of
the Seljuq sultans, but sometimes de facto  rulers themselves. Under the Seljuq Turks, local poets such as Nizami Ganjavi  and 
Khagani Shirvani  gave rise to a blossoming of Persian literature  on the territory of present-day Azerbaijan.

The next ruling state of the Jalayirids  was short-lived and fell as a conquest of Timur.

The local dynasty of the Shirvanshahs  became a vassal  state of Timur's Empire, and assisted him in his war with the ruler of the
 Golden Horde  Tokhtamysh. Following Timur's death, two independent and rival states emerged: Kara Koyunlu  and Ak Koyunlu. The
Shirvanshahs returned, maintaining a high degree of autonomy as local rulers and vassals from 861 until 1539. During their
conquest and persecution by the Iranian Safavids  in 1501, the last dynasty imposed Shia Islam  upon the formerly Sunni 
population,[58][59][60]  as it did over its territories in modern-day Iran, as it was battling against the Sunni Ottoman Empire.
[61]  This, in combination with another series of events, the Safavids laid the foundation for the fact that Iran and the
contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan are the only Shia-majority countries ever since.[62]  Despite efforts of the Safavids, the
Ottomans briefly managed to occupy swaths of present-day Azerbaijan twice over the centuries. Also, Baku and its environs were
briefly managed by the Russians in the early 18th century as a consequence of the Russo-Persian War. Despite these very brief
intermissions by Safavid Iran's neighboring rivals, the land of what is nowadays Azerbaijan remained under intermittent  Iranian 
rule from the earliest advent of the Safavids up to the course of the 19th century.

MODERN ERA
Main articles: Russo-Persian Wars, Treaty of Gulistan, and Treaty of TurkmenchaySee also: Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, 
Azerbaijan SSR, and Operation Edelweiss
Territories of the Northern and Southern Khanates (and Sultanates) in the 18th–19th centuries.[63]After the Safavids, the area was ruled by the Iranian dynasties of Afshar  and Zand  and briefly by the Qajars, until the latter
was eventually forced to cede it to the Russian Empire in the course of the 19th century. However, self-ruling khanates  with
various forms of independence[64][65][66][67][68]  emerged in the area, especially following the collapse of the Zand dynasty and
in the early Qajar era. These khanates, though often self-ruling, were vassals  and subjects  of the Iranian shah.[69]  The
khanates exercised control over their affairs via international trade routes between Central Asia and the West.[70]  From the late
18th century on, Imperial Russia switched to a more aggressive geo-political stance towards its two neighbors and rivals to the
south, namely Iran and Turkey.[71]  Following a chain of events that started with the re-subjugation of Georgia into Iran  in
1795, Russia would now actively contest and battle with the latter over possession of the Caucasus region which was, for the most
part, in the hands of Iran.[72]  The successful Russian campaigns in the later stages of the Russo-Persian War (1804–13)  were
concluded with the Treaty of Gulistan, in which the shah's claims to some of the Khanates of the Caucasus were dismissed by Russia
on the ground that they had been de facto  independent long before their Russian occupation.[73]

The siege of Ganja Fortress in 1804  during the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813)  by Russian forces under the leadership of General 
Pavel Tsitsianov.Following Qajar Iran's loss in the 1804–1813 war, it was forced to concede suzerainty over most of the khanates,
along with Georgia and Dagestan to the Russian Empire, per the Gulistan  treaty.[74]

The area to the north of the river Aras, amongst which territory lies the contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan, was Iranian
territory until it was occupied by Russia in the 19th century.[6][75][76][77][78][79]  Under the Treaty of Turkmenchay  which
ended the Russo-Persian War (1826-1828), Qajar Iran  was forced to recognize Russian sovereignty over the Erivan Khanate, the 
Nakhchivan Khanate  and the remainder of the Lankaran Khanate,[74]  comprising the last parts of the soil of the contemporary
Azerbaijani Republic that were still in Iranian hands. After incorporation of all Caucasian territories from Iran into Russia, the
new border between the two was set at the Aras River, which, upon the Soviet Union's disintegration, subsequently became part of
the border between Iran and the Azerbaijan Republic.

Qajar Iran was forced to cede its Caucasian territories to Russia in the 19th century, which thus included the territory of the
modern-day Azerbaijan Republic, while as a result of that cession, the Azerbaijani ethnic group  is nowadays parted between two
nations: Iran and Azerbaijan.[80]  Furthermore, the number of ethnic Azerbaijanis in Iran far outnumber those in neighbouring
Azerbaijan.

After the collapse of the Russian Empire during World War I, the short-lived Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic  was
declared, constituting what are the present-day republics of Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Armenia.

It was followed by the March Days  massacres[81][82][83]  that took place between 30 March and 2 April 1918 in the city of Baku 
and adjacent areas of the Baku Governorate  of the Russian Empire.[84]  When the republic dissolved in May 1918, the leading 
Musavat  party declared independence as the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  (ADR), adopting the name of "Azerbaijan" for the new
republic; a name that prior to the proclamation of the ADR was solely used to refer to the adjacent northwestern region of
contemporary Iran.[40][41][42]  The ADR was the first modern parliamentary republic  in the Muslim world.[6][85][86]  Among the
important accomplishments of the Parliament was the extension of suffrage to women, making Azerbaijan the first Muslim nation to
grant women equal political rights with men.[85]  Another important accomplishment of ADR was the establishment of Baku State
University, which was the first modern-type university founded in Muslim East.[85]

Map presented by delegation from Azerbaijan to Paris Peace Conference  in 1919.By March 1920, it was obvious that Soviet Russia
would attack Baku. Vladimir Lenin  said that the invasion was justified as Soviet Russia  could not survive without Baku's oil.
[87][88]  Independent Azerbaijan lasted only 23 months until the Bolshevik  11th Soviet Red Army  invaded it, establishing the 
Azerbaijan SSR  on 28 April 1920. Although the bulk of the newly formed Azerbaijani army was engaged in putting down an Armenian
revolt that had just broken out in Karabakh, Azerbaijanis did not surrender their brief independence of 1918–20 quickly or easily.
As many as 20,000 Azerbaijani soldiers died resisting what was effectively a Russian reconquest.[89]

On 13 October 1921, the Soviet republics of Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia signed an agreement with Turkey known as the 
Treaty of Kars. The previously independent Naxicivan SSR would also become an autonomous ASSR within the Azerbaijan SSR by the
treaty of Kars. On the other hand, Armenia was awarded the region of Zangezur  and Turkey agreed to return Gyumri  (then known as
Alexandropol).

During World War II, Azerbaijan played a crucial role in the strategic energy policy of the Soviet Union, with 80 percent of the
Soviet Union's oil on the Eastern Front  being supplied by Baku. By the Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR  in February
1942, the commitment of more than 500 workers and employees of the oil industry  of Azerbaijan were awarded orders and medals. 
Operation Edelweiss  carried out by the German Wehrmacht  targeted Baku because of its importance as the energy (petroleum) dynamo
of the USSR.[6]  A fifth of all Azerbaijanis fought in the Second World War from 1941 to 1945. Approximately 681,000 people with
over 100,000 of them women went to the front, while the total population of Azerbaijan was 3.4 million at the time.[90]  Some
250,000 people from Azerbaijan were killed on the front. More than 130 Azerbaijanis were named Heroes of the Soviet Union.
Azerbaijani Major-General Azi Aslanov  was twice awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union.[91]

REPUBLIC ERA
Red Army  paratroops  during the Black January  tragedy in 1990.Following the politics of glasnost, initiated by Mikhail Gorbachev, civil unrest and ethnic strife grew in various regions of the
Soviet Union, including Nagorno-Karabakh,[92]  an autonomous region of the Azerbaijan SSR. The disturbances in Azerbaijan, in
response to Moscow's indifference to already heated conflict, resulted in calls for independence and secession, which culminated
in Black January  in Baku.[93]  Later in 1990, the Supreme Council of the Azerbaijan SSR  dropped the words "Soviet Socialist"
from the title, adopted the Declaration of Sovereignty of the Azerbaijan Republic and restored flag of the Azerbaijan Democratic
Republic as the state flag.[94]  On 18 October 1991, the Supreme Council of Azerbaijan adopted a Declaration of Independence which
was affirmed by a nationwide referendum in December 1991, when the Soviet Union officially ceased to exist on 26 December 1991.
[94]

The early years of independence were overshadowed by the Nagorno-Karabakh war  with the ethnic Armenian majority of
Nagorno-Karabakh backed by Armenia.[95]  By the end of hostilities in 1994, Armenians controlled up to 14–16 percent of
Azerbaijani territory, including Nagorno-Karabakh itself.[96][97]  During the war many atrocities were committed including the 
massacre  at Malibeyli and Gushchular, the Garadaghly, Agdaban  and the Khojaly massacres.[98][99]  Furthermore, an estimated
30,000 people had been killed and more than a million people had been displaced.[100]  Four United Nations Security Council 
Resolutions (822, 853, 874, and 884) demand for "the immediate withdrawal of all Armenian forces from all occupied territories of
Azerbaijan."[101]  Many Russians and Armenians left Azerbaijan during the 1990s.[102]  According to the 1970 census, there were
510,000 ethnic Russians  and 484,000 Armenians in Azerbaijan.[103]

In 1993, democratically elected president Abulfaz Elchibey  was overthrown by a military insurrection led by Colonel Surat
Huseynov, which resulted in the rise to power of the former leader of Soviet Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev.[104]  In 1994, Surat
Huseynov, by that time a prime minister, attempted another military coup against Heydar Aliyev, but Huseynov was arrested and
charged with treason.[105]  A year later, in 1995, another coup  was attempted against Aliyev, this time by the commander of the 
OMON  special unit, Rovshan Javadov. The coup was averted, resulting in the killing of the latter and disbanding of Azerbaijan's
OMON units.[106][107]  At the same time, the country was tainted by rampant corruption in the governing bureaucracy.[108]  In
October 1998, Aliyev was reelected for a second term. Despite the much improved economy, particularly with the exploitations of 
Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli oil field  and Shah Deniz gas field, Aliyev's presidency was criticized due to suspected vote fraud and
corruption.[109]

Ilham Aliyev, the son of Heydar Aliyev, assumed as the chairmen of the New Azerbaijan Party  as well as the office of presidency
when his father died in 2003. He was reelected to a third term  as president in October 2013. He then launched a crackdown on
opposition elements. In November, he put two prominent opponents on trial for inciting riots ten months earlier: Ilgar Mammadov,
the chairman of the opposition Republican Alternative (REAL); and Ilgar Mammadov, the deputy chairman of the New Equality Party
(Musavat). In addition the dissident Islamic theologian Taleh Bagirzada was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. The opposition
newspaper Azadiq  was closed down. Three men were sentenced to life in prison on charges of plotting attacks in Baku in a
conspiracy with Iran.[110]

GEOGRAPHY
Azerbaijan map of Köppen climate classification.Main articles: Geography of Azerbaijan, Environment of Azerbaijan, State reserves
of Azerbaijan, and National parks of AzerbaijanSee also: Extreme points of AzerbaijanCaucasus Mountains  in northern Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan is in the South Caucasus  region of Eurasia, straddling Western Asia  and Eastern Europe. It lies between latitudes 38° 
 and 42° N, and longitudes 44°  and 51° E. The total length of Azerbaijan's land borders  is 2,648 km (1,645 mi), of which
1007 kilometers are with Armenia, 756 kilometers with Iran, 480 kilometers with Georgia, 390 kilometers with Russia and
15 kilometers with Turkey.[111]  The coastline  stretches for 800 km (497 mi), and the length of the widest area of the
Azerbaijani section of the Caspian Sea is 456 km (283 mi).[111]  The territory of Azerbaijan extends 400 km (249 mi) from north to
south, and 500 km (311 mi) from west to east.

Three physical features dominate Azerbaijan: the Caspian Sea, whose shoreline forms a natural boundary to the east; the Greater
Caucasus  mountain range to the north; and the extensive flatlands at the country's center. There are also three mountain ranges,
the Greater and Lesser Caucasus, and the Talysh Mountains, together covering approximately 40 percent of the country.[112]  The
highest peak of Azerbaijan is mount Bazardüzü  (4,466 m), while the lowest point lies in the Caspian Sea (−28 m). Nearly half of
all the mud volcanoes  on Earth are concentrated in Azerbaijan, these volcanoes  were also among nominees for the New7Wonders of
Nature.[113]

The main water sources are surface waters. However, only 24 of the 8,350 rivers are greater than 100 km (62 mi) in length.[112] 
All the rivers drain into the Caspian Sea in the east of the country.[112]  The largest lake is Sarysu  (67 km²), and the longest
river is Kur  (1,515 km), which is transboundary. Azerbaijan's four main islands in the Caspian Sea have a combined area of over
thirty square kilometers.

Since the independence of Azerbaijan in 1991, the Azerbaijani government  has taken drastic measures to preserve the environment
of Azerbaijan. But national protection of the environment started to truly improve after 2001 when the state budget increased due
to new revenues provided by the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline. Within four years protected areas doubled and now make up eight
percent of the country's territory. Since 2001 the government has set up seven large reserves and almost doubled the sector of the
budget earmarked for environmental protection.[114]

LANDSCAPE
Main articles: Orography of Azerbaijan, Climate of Azerbaijan, and Water bodies of AzerbaijanMount Bazarduzu, the highest peak of
Azerbaijan, as seen from Mount Shahdagh
The landscape of Khinalug valley.Azerbaijan is home to a vast variety of landscapes. Over half of Azerbaijan's land mass consists
of mountain ridges, crests, yailas, and plateaus which rise up to hypsometric levels of 400–1000 meters (including the Middle and
Lower lowlands), in some places (Talis, Jeyranchol-Ajinohur and Langabiz-Alat foreranges) up to 100–120 meters, and others from
0–50 meters and up (Qobustan, Absheron). The rest of Azerbaijan's terrain consist of plains and lowlands. Hypsometric marks within
the Caucasus region vary from about −28 meters at the Caspian Sea shoreline up to 4,466 meters (Bazardüzü peak).[115]

The formation of climate in Azerbaijan is influenced particularly by cold arctic  air masses  of Scandinavian anticyclone,
temperate of Siberian  anticyclone, and Central Asian anticyclone.[116]  Azerbaijan's diverse landscape affects the ways air
masses enter the country.[116]  The Greater Caucasus protects the country from direct influences of cold air masses coming from
the north. That leads to the formation of subtropical climate  on most foothills and plains of the country. Meanwhile, plains and
foothills are characterized by high solar radiation  rates.

Nine out of 11 existing climate zones  are present in Azerbaijan.[117]  Both the absolute minimum temperature ( −33 °C or −27.4 °F 
 ) and the absolute maximum temperature ( 46 °C or 114.8 °F  ) were observed in Julfa  and Ordubad.[117]  The maximum annual 
precipitation  falls in Lankaran  (1,600 to 1,800 mm or 63 to 71 in) and the minimum in Absheron (200 to 350 mm or 7.9 to
13.8 in).[117]

Murovdag  is the highest mountain range  in the Lesser Caucasus.Rivers and lakes form the principal part of the water systems of
Azerbaijan, they were formed over a long geological timeframe and changed significantly throughout that period. This is
particularly evidenced by remnants of ancient rivers found throughout the country. The country's water systems are continually
changing under the influence of natural forces and human introduced industrial activities. Artificial rivers (canals) and ponds
are a part of Azerbaijan's water systems. In terms of water supply, Azerbaijan is below the average in the world with
approximately 100,000 cubic metres (3,531,467 cubic feet) per year of water per square kilometer.[117]  All big water reservoirs 
are built on Kur. The hydrography of Azerbaijan basically belongs to the Caspian Sea basin.

There are 8,350 rivers of various lengths within Azerbaijan. Only 24 rivers are over 100 kilometers long.[118]  The Kura  and Aras 
 are the most popular rivers in Azerbaijan, they run through the Kura-Aras Lowland. The rivers that directly flow into the Caspian
Sea, originate mainly from the north-eastern slope of the Major Caucasus and Talysh Mountains  and run along the Samur–Devechi and
Lankaran lowlands.

Yanar Dag, translated as "burning mountain", is a natural gas fire which blazes continuously on a hillside on the Absheron
Peninsula  on the Caspian Sea  near Baku, which itself is known as the "land of fire." Flames jet out into the air from a thin,
porous sandstone layer. It is a tourist attraction to visitors to the Baku area.

BIODIVERSITY
Main article: Wildlife of AzerbaijanFurther information: Fauna of Azerbaijan  and Flora of Azerbaijan
The Karabakh horse  is the national animal of Azerbaijan.The first reports on the richness and diversity of animal life in
Azerbaijan can be found in travel notes of Eastern travelers. Animal carvings on architectural monuments, ancient rocks and stones
survived up to the present times. The first information on the animal kingdom of Azerbaijan was collected during the visits of
naturalists to Azerbaijan in the 17th century.[112]  Unlike fauna, the concept of animal kingdom covers not only the types of
animals, but also the number of individual species.

There are 106 species of mammals, 97 species of fish, 363 species of birds, 10 species of amphibians and 52 species of reptiles
which have been recorded and classified in Azerbaijan.[112]  The national animal of Azerbaijan is the Karabakh horse, a
mountain-steppe racing and riding horse endemic to Azerbaijan. The Karabakh horse has a reputation for its good temper, speed,
elegance and intelligence. It is one of the oldest breeds, with ancestry dating to the ancient world. However today the horse is
an endangered species.[119]

Azerbaijan's flora consists of more than 4,500 species of higher plants. Due to the unique climate in Azerbaijan, the flora is
much richer in the number of species than the flora of the other republics of the South Caucasus.[120]  About 67 percent of the
species growing in the whole Caucasus  can be found in Azerbaijan.

POLITICS
Main article: Politics of AzerbaijanSee also: Elections in Azerbaijan  and Human rights in Azerbaijan
The son of former President Heydar Aliyev, Ilham Aliyev  succeeded his father and has remained in power since 2003.The structural
formation of Azerbaijan's political system was completed by the adoption of the new Constitution  on 12 November 1995. According
to the Article 23 of Constitution, the state symbols  of the Azerbaijan Republic are the flag, the coat of arms  and the national
anthem. The state power in Azerbaijan is limited only by law for internal issues, but for international affairs is additionally
limited by the provisions of international agreements.

The government of Azerbaijan is based on the separation of powers  among the legislative, executive and judicial  branches. The
legislative power is held by the unicameral  National Assembly  and the Supreme National Assembly in the Nakhchivan Autonomous
Republic. Parliamentary elections are held every five years, on the first Sunday of November. The Yeni Azerbaijan Party, and
independents loyal to the ruling government, currently hold almost all of the Parliament's 125 seats. During the 2010
Parliamentary election, the opposition parties, Musavat  and Azerbaijani Popular Front Party, failed to win a single seat.
European observers found numerous irregularities  in the run-up to the election and on election day.[121]

The executive power is held by the president, who is elected for a five-year term by direct elections, and the Prime Minister of
Azerbaijan. The president is authorized to form the Cabinet, a collective executive body, accountable to both the President and
the National Assembly. The Cabinet of Azerbaijan consists primarily of the Prime Minister, his Deputies and Ministers. The
president does not have the right to dissolve the National Assembly, but he has the right to veto its decisions. To override the
presidential veto, the parliament must have a majority of 95 votes. The judicial power is vested in the Constitutional Court, 
Supreme Court  and the Economic Court. The President nominates the judges in these courts.

The Security Council is the deliberative body under the president, and he organizes it according to the Constitution. It was
established on 10 April 1997. The administrative department is not a part of the president's office but manages the financial,
technical and pecuniary activities of both the president and his office.

Although Azerbaijan has held several elections since regaining its independence and it has many of the formal institutions of
democracy, it remains classified as "not free" (on border with "partly free") by Freedom House.[122][123]  In recent years, large
numbers of Azerbaijani journalists, bloggers, lawyers, human rights activists have been rounded up and jailed for their criticism
of President Aliyev and government authorities.[124]  A resolution adopted by the European Parliament in September 2015 described
Azerbaijan as "having suffered the greatest decline in democratic governance in all of Eurasia over the past ten years," noting as
well that its dialogue with the country on human rights has "not made any substantial progress."[125]

Azerbaijan has been harshly criticized for bribing foreign officials and diplomats for promoting its causes abroad and
legitimizing its elections at home, a practice which has been termed as 'caviar diplomacy'.[126][127][128][129]

FOREIGN RELATIONS
Main article: Foreign relations of AzerbaijanSee also: Azerbaijan and the European UnionVladimir Putin  in Azerbaijan in August
2013The short-lived Azerbaijan Democratic Republic succeeded in establishing diplomatic relations with six countries, sending
diplomatic representatives to Germany and Finland.[130]  The process of international recognition of Azerbaijan's independence
from the collapsing Soviet Union lasted roughly one year. The most recent country to recognize Azerbaijan was Bahrain, on 6
November 1996.[131]  Full diplomatic relations, including mutual exchanges of missions, were first established with Turkey,
Pakistan, the United States, Iran[130]  and Israel.[132]  Azerbaijan has placed a particular emphasis on its "Special Relationship
" with Turkey.[133][134]

Azerbaijan has diplomatic relations with 158 countries so far and holds membership in 38 international organizations.[14]  It
holds observer status in the Non-Aligned Movement  and World Trade Organization  and is a correspondent at the International
Telecommunication Union.[14]  On 9 May 2006 Azerbaijan was elected to membership in the newly established Human Rights Council  by
the United Nations General Assembly. The term of office began on 19 June 2006.[16]

Ilham Aliyev  attends the Caspian Sea Summit in Astrakhan, Russia, 29 September 2014Foreign policy priorities of Azerbaijan
include, first of all, the restoration of its territorial integrity; elimination of the consequences of the loss of
Nagorno-Karabakh and seven other regions of Azerbaijan;[135][136]  integration into European and Euro-Atlantic structure;
contribution to international security; cooperation with international organizations; regional cooperation and bilateral
relations; strengthening of defense capability; promotion of security by domestic policy means; strengthening of democracy;
preservation of the ethnic and religious tolerance; scientific, educational, and cultural policy and preservation of moral values;
economic and social development; enhancing internal and border security; and migration, energy, and transportation security
policy.[135]

The Azerbaijani government, in late 2007, stated that the long-standing dispute over the Armenian-occupied territory of
Nagorno-Karabakh is almost certain to spark a new war if it remains unresolved.[135]  The Government is in the process of
increasing its military budget. Furthermore, an attack by the Azerbaijani military in 2016 on Armenian villages in
Nagorno-Karabakh has caused physical damage and raised controversy over the future of peaceful relations between Azerbaijan and
its neighbor, Armenia.[137]

Azerbaijan is an active member of international coalitions fighting international terrorism. The country is contributing to
peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq. Azerbaijan is an active member of NATO's Partnership for Peace  program. It
also maintains good relations with the European Union  and could potentially one day apply for membership.[135]

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
Main article: Administrative divisions of AzerbaijanAzerbaijan is divided into 10 economic regions; 66 rayons  (rayonlar, singular rayon) and 77 cities (şəhərlər, singular şəhər) of
which 12 are under the direct authority of the republic.[138]  Moreover, Azerbaijan includes the Autonomous Republic  (muxtar
respublika) of Nakhchivan.[96]  The President of Azerbaijan  appoints the governors of these units, while the government of
Nakhchivan is elected and approved by the parliament of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.

Absheron Economic Region * Absheron  (Abşeron)
 * Khizi  (Xızı)
 * Baku  (Bakı)
 * Sumqayit  (Sumqayıt)

Aran Economic Region * Aghjabadi  (Ağcabədi)
 * Aghdash  (Ağdaş)
 * Barda  (Bərdə)
 * Beylagan  (Beyləqan)
 * Bilasuvar  (Biləsuvar)
 * Goychay  (Göyçay)
 * Hajigabul  (Hacıqabul)
 * Imishli  (İmişli)
 * Kurdamir  (Kürdəmir)
 * Neftchala  (Neftçala)
 * Saatly  (Saatlı)
 * Sabirabad  (Sabirabad)
 * Salyan  (Salyan)
 * Ujar  (Ucar)
 * Yevlakh  (Yevlax)
 * Zardab  (Zərdab)
 * Mingachevir  (Mingəçevir)
 * Shirvan  (Şirvan)
 * Yevlakh  (Yevlax)

Daghlig Shirvan * Aghsu  (Ağsu)
 * Gobustan  (Qobustan)
 * Ismailly  (İsmayıllı)
 * Shamakhy  (Şamaxı)

Ganja-Gazakh * Aghstafa  (Ağstafa)
 * Dashkasan  (Daşkəsən)
 * Gadabay  (Gədəbəy)
 * Gazakh  (Qazax)
 * Goygol  (Göygöl)
 * Goranboy  (Goranboy)
 * Samukh  (Samux)
 * Shamkir  (Şəmkir)
 * Tovuz  (Tovuz)
 * Ganja  (Gəncə)
 * Naftalan  (Naftalan)

Guba-Khachmaz * Guba  (Quba)
 * Gusar  (Qusar)
 * Khachmaz  (Xaçmaz)
 * Shabran  (Şabran)
 * Siyazan  (Siyəzən)

Kalbajar-Lachin * Gubadly  (Qubadlı)
 * Kalbajar  (Kəlbəcər)
 * Lachin  (Laçın)
 * Zangilan  (Zəngilan)

Lankaran * Astara  (Astara)
 * Jalilabad  (Cəlilabad)
 * Lankaran  (Lənkəran)
 * Lerik  (Lerik)
 * Masally  (Masallı)

 * Yardimly  (Yardımlı)
 * Lankaran  (Lənkəran)

Nakhchivan * Babek  (Babək)
 * Julfa  (Culfa)
 * Kangarli  (Kəngərli)
 * Ordubad  (Ordubad)
 * Sadarak  (Sədərək)
 * Shahbuz  (Şahbuz)
 * Sharur  (Şərur)
 * Nakhchivan  (Naxçıvan)

Shaki-Zaqatala * Balakan  (Balakən)
 * Gabala  (Qəbələ)
 * Gakh  (Qax)
 * Oghuz  (Oğuz)
 * Shaki  (Şəki)
 * Zaqatala  (Zaqatala)
 * Shaki  (Şəki)

Yukhari Garabakh * Aghdam  (Ağdam)
 * Fuzuli  (Füzuli)
 * Jabrayil  (Cəbrayıl)
 * Khojaly  (Xocalı)
 * Khojavend  (Xocavənd)
 * Shusha  (Şuşa)
 * Tartar  (Tərtər)
 * Khankendi  (Xankəndi)
 * Shusha  (Şuşa)

Azerbaijan is divided into 10 economic regionsNote: The cities under the direct authority of the republic in italics.

MILITARY
Main article: Azerbaijani Armed ForcesAzerbaijani Navy  fleet during the 2011 military parade in Baku.
Azerbaijani Special Forces during military parade.The history of the modern Azerbaijan army dates back to Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  in 1918, when the National Army of the
newly formed Azerbaijan Democratic Republic was created on 26 June 1918.[139][140]  When Azerbaijan gained independence after the 
dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Armed Forces of the Republic of Azerbaijan were created according to the Law on the Armed
Forces of 9 October 1991.[141]  The original date of the establishment of the short-lived National Army is celebrated as Army Day
(26 June) in today's Azerbaijan.[142]  As of 2002, Azerbaijan had 95,000 active personnel in its armed forces. There are also
17,000 paramilitary troops.[143]  The armed forces have three branches: the Land Forces, the Air Forces  and the Navy.
Additionally the armed forces embrace several military sub-groups that can be involved in state defense when needed. These are the
 Internal Troops  of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the State Border Service, which includes the Coast Guard  as well.[96] 
The Azerbaijan National Guard  is a further paramilitary force. It operates as a semi-independent entity of the Special State
Protection Service, an agency subordinate to the President.[144]

Contingent from the Azerbaijani military during the Moscow Victory Day Parade, 9 May 2015Azerbaijan adheres to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe  and has signed all major international arms and weapons
treaties. Azerbaijan closely cooperates with NATO  in programs such as Partnership for Peace  and Individual Partnership Action
Plan. Azerbaijan has deployed 151 of its Peacekeeping Forces in Iraq and another 184 in Afghanistan.[145]

The defense budget of Azerbaijan for 2011 was set at US$3.1 billion.[146]  In addition to that, $1.36 billion was planned to be
used for the needs of the defense industry, which bring up the total military spending to billion.[146][147]  Azerbaijani
President Ilham Aliyev said on 26 June 2011 that the defence spending reached $3.3 billion that year.[148]

Azerbaijan's defense budget for 2013 is $3.7 billion.[149][150]

Azerbaijani defense industry manufactures small arms, artillery systems, tanks, armors and noctovision devices, aviation bombs,
pilotless vehicles, various military vehicles and military planes and helicopters.[151][152][153][154]

ECONOMY
Main article: Economy of AzerbaijanAfter gaining independence in 1991, Azerbaijan became a member of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Islamic Development Bank  and the Asian Development Bank.[155]  The banking system of
Azerbaijan consists of the Central Bank of Azerbaijan, commercial banks  and non-banking credit organizations. The National (now
Central) Bank was created in 1992 based on the Azerbaijan State Savings Bank, an affiliate of the former State Savings Bank of the
USSR. The Central Bank serves as Azerbaijan's central bank, empowered to issue the national currency, the Azerbaijani manat, and
to supervise all commercial banks. Two major commercial banks are UniBank  and the state-owned International Bank of Azerbaijan,
run by Dr. Jahangir Hajiyev.

Pushed up by spending and demand growth, the 2007 Q1  inflation rate reached 16.6%.[156]  Nominal incomes and monthly wages
climbed 29% and 25% respectively against this figure, but price increases in non-oil industry encouraged inflation.[156] 
Azerbaijan shows some signs of the so-called "Dutch disease" because of its fast-growing energy sector, which causes inflation and
makes non-energy exports more expensive.

In the early 2000s the chronically high inflation was brought under control. This led to the launch of a new currency, the new
Azerbaijani manat, on 1 January 2006, to cement the economic reforms and erase the vestiges of an unstable economy.[157][158]

In 2008, Azerbaijan was cited as one of the top 10 reformers by the World Bank's Doing Business Report.[159]

Azerbaijan led the world as the top reformer in 2007/08, with improvements on seven out of 10 indicators of regulatory reform.
Azerbaijan started operating a one-stop shop in January 2008 that halved the time, cost and number of procedures to start a
business. Business registrations increased by 40% in the first six months. Azerbaijan also eliminated the minimum loan cutoff of
$1,100, more than doubling the number of borrowers covered by the credit registry. Also, taxpayers can now file forms and pay
their taxes online. Azerbaijan's extensive reforms moved it far up the ranks, from 97 to 33 in the overall ease of doing business.

Azerbaijan is also ranked 57th in the Global Competitiveness Report  for 2010–2011, above other CIS countries.[160]  By 2012 the 
GDP  of Azerbaijan had increased 20-fold from to its 1995 level.[161]

ENERGY
Main article: Energy in AzerbaijanFurther information: Petroleum industry in Azerbaijan
A pumping unit  for the mechanical extraction of oil on the outskirts of Baku.Two-thirds of Azerbaijan is rich in oil and natural
gas.[162]  The region of the Lesser Caucasus  accounts for most of the country's gold, silver, iron, copper, titanium, chromium, 
manganese, cobalt, molybdenum, complex ore  and antimony.[162]  In September 1994, a 30-year contract was signed between the 
State
Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic  (SOCAR) and 13 oil companies, among them Amoco, BP, ExxonMobil, Lukoil  and Statoil.[155]  As
Western oil companies are able to tap deepwater oilfields  untouched by the Soviet exploitation, Azerbaijan is considered one of
the most important spots in the world for oil exploration  and development.[163]  Meanwhile, the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan  was
established as an extra-budgetary fund to ensure macroeconomic  stability, transparency in the management of oil revenue, and
safeguarding of resources for future generations.

Azeriqaz, a sub-company of SOCAR, intends to ensure full gasification of the country by 2021.[164]

AGRICULTURE
Main article: Agriculture in AzerbaijanAzerbaijan has the largest agricultural basin in the region. About 54.9 percent of
Azerbaijan is agricultural land.[111]  At the beginning of 2007 there were 4,755,100 hectares of utilized agricultural area.[165] 
In the same year the total wood resources counted 136 million m³.[165]  Azerbaijan's agricultural scientific research institutes
are focused on meadows and pastures, horticulture and subtropical  crops, green vegetables, viticulture  and wine-making, cotton
growing and medicinal plants.[166]  In some areas it is profitable to grow grain, potatoes, sugar beets, cotton[167]  and tobacco.
Livestock, dairy products, and wine and spirits  are also important farm products. The Caspian fishing industry  concentrates on
the dwindling stocks of sturgeon  and beluga. In 2002 the Azerbaijani merchant marine  had 54 ships.[168]

Some products previously imported from abroad have begun to be produced locally. Among them are Coca Cola by Coca Cola Bottlers
LTD, beer by Baki-Kastel, parquet by Nehir and oil pipes by EUPEC Pipe Coating Azerbaijan.[169]

TOURISM
Main article: Tourism in AzerbaijanShahdag Mountain Resort  is the country's largest winter resort.Tourism is an important part of
the economy of Azerbaijan. The country was a well-known tourist spot in the 1980s. However, the fall of the Soviet Union, and the
Nagorno-Karabakh War during the 1990s, damaged the tourist industry and the image of Azerbaijan as a tourist destination.[170]

It was not until the 2000s that the tourism industry began to recover, and the country has since experienced a high rate of growth
in the number of tourist visits and overnight stays.[171]  In the recent years, Azerbaijan has also becoming a popular destination
for religious, spa, and health care tourism.[172]  During winter, the Shahdag Mountain Resort  offers skiing with state of the art
facilities.

The government of Azerbaijan  has set the development of Azerbaijan as an elite tourist destination as a top priority. It is a
national strategy to make tourism a major, if not the single largest, contributor to the Azerbaijani economy.[173]  These
activities are regulated by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Azerbaijan.

TRANSPORTATION
Main articles: Transportation in Azerbaijan  and Rail transport in AzerbaijanThe convenient location of Azerbaijan on the
crossroad of major international traffic arteries, such as the Silk Road  and the south–north corridor, highlights the strategic
importance of transportation sector for the country's economy.[174]  The transport sector in the country includes roads, railways,
aviation, and maritime transport.

Azerbaijan is also an important economic hub in the transportation of raw materials. The Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan pipeline  (BTC)
became operational in May 2006 and extends more than 1,774 kilometers through the territories of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey.
The BTC is designed to transport up to 50 million tons of crude oil annually and carries oil from the Caspian Sea oilfields to
global markets.[175]  The South Caucasus Pipeline, also stretching through the territory of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey, became
operational at the end of 2006 and offers additional gas supplies to the European market from the Shah Deniz gas field. Shah Deniz
is expected to produce up to 296 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year.[176]  Azerbaijan also plays a major role in the
EU-sponsored Silk Road Project.

In 2002, the Azerbaijani government established the Ministry of Transport with a broad range of policy and regulatory functions.
In the same year, the country became a member of the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic.[177]  The highest priority being;
upgrading the transport network and transforming transportation services into one of the key comparative advantages of the
country, as this would be highly conducive to the development of other sectors of the economy.

In 2012, the construction of Kars–Tbilisi–Baku railway  expected to provide transportation between Asia and Europe through
connecting the railways of China and Kazakhstan in the east with Turkey's Marmaray  to the European railway system in the west. 
Broad-gauge  railways in 2010 stretched for 2,918 km (1,813 mi) and electrified railways numbered 1,278 km (794 mi). By 2010,
there were 35 airports and one heliport.[96]

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Main articles: Communications in Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan National Aerospace Agency, and List of Azerbaijani inventions and
discoveriesShamakhi Astrophysical ObservatoryIn the 21st century, a new oil and gas boom helped to improve the situation in
Azerbaijan's science and technology sectors, and the government launched a campaign aimed at modernization and innovation. The
government estimates that profits from the information technology and communication industry will grow and become comparable with
those from oil production.[178]

Azerbaijan has a large and steadily growing Internet sector, mostly uninfluenced by the global financial crisis; rapid growth is
forecast for at least five more years.[179]

The country has also been making progress in developing its telecoms sector. The Ministry of Communications & Information
Technologies (MCIT), as well as being an operator through its role in Aztelekom, is both a policy-maker and regulator. Public pay
phones are available for local calls and require the purchase of a token from the telephone exchange or some shops and kiosks.
Tokens allow a call of indefinite duration. As of 2009[update], there were 1,397,000 main telephone lines[180]  and 1,485,000
internet users.[181]  There are four GSM  providers: Azercell, Bakcell, Azerfon (Nar Mobile), Nakhtel  mobile network operators
and one CDMA.

In the 21st century a number of prominent Azerbaijani geodynamics  and geotectonics  scientists, inspired by the fundamental works
of Elchin Khalilov  and others, designed hundreds of earthquake prediction stations and earthquake-resistant buildings that now
constitute the bulk of The Republican Center of Seismic Service.[182][183][184]

The Azerbaijan National Aerospace Agency  launched its first satellite AzerSat 1  into orbit on 7 February 2013 from Guiana Space
Centre  in French Guiana at orbital positions 46° East.[185][186][187]  The satellite will cover Europe and significant part of
Asian countries and Africa and will have transmission for TV, radio broadcasting and the internet.[188]  The launch of its own
satellite on orbit is Azerbaijan's first action in realizing prospective projects to turn itself into a country with a space
industry.[189][190]

DEMOGRAPHICS
Main article: Demographics of AzerbaijanFurther information: Ethnic minorities in AzerbaijanEthnic composition (2009)[191]
Azerbaijani91.60%Lezgian2.02%Armenian1.35%Russian1.34%Talysh1.26%Other nations2.43%From the total population of 9,165,000 people
as of July 2011, nearly 52% was urban population, the remaining 48% was the rural population.[192]  51% of the total population
were female.[192]  The sex ratio  for total population in that year was therefore 0.97 males per female.[96]

The 2011 population growth-rate was 0.85%, compared to 1.09% worldwide.[96]  A significant factor restricting the population
growth is rather a high level of migration. In 2011 Azerbaijan saw migration of −1.14/1,000 people.[96]

The Azerbaijani diaspora  is found in 42 countries[193]  and in turn there are many centers for ethnic minorities inside
Azerbaijan, including the German cultural society "Karelhaus", Slavic  cultural center, Azerbaijani-Israeli community, Kurdish 
cultural center, International Talysh  Association, Lezgin  national center "Samur", Azerbaijani-Tatar  community, Crimean Tatars 
society, etc.[194]

The ethnic composition of the population according to the 2009 population census: 91.60% Azerbaijanis, 2.02% Lezgians, 1.35% 
Armenians  (almost all Armenians live in the break-away region of Nagorno-Karabakh), 1.34% Russians, 1.26% Talysh, 0.56% Avars,
0.43% Turks, 0.29% Tatars, 0.28% Tats, 0.24% Ukrainians, 0.14% Tsakhurs, 0.11% Georgians, 0.10% Jews, 0.07% Kurds, other 0.21%.

Iranian Azerbaijanis  are by far the largest minority in Iran. The number of ethnic Azerbaijanis in Iran furthermore far outnumber
those in neighboring Azerbaijan. The CIA World Factbook estimates Iranian Azerbaijanis as comprising at least 16% of Iran's
population.[195]

URBANIZATION
Main article: List of cities in AzerbaijanIn total, Azerbaijan has 77 cities, 64 smaller rayon-class cities, and one special legal status city. These are followed by 257
urban-type settlements and 4,620 villages.[196]

LANGUAGE
Main article: Languages of AzerbaijanThe official language is Azerbaijani, which is spoken by approximately 92% of the population as a mother tongue.[197]  It belongs
to the Turkic  language family. Russian and Armenian  are also spoken, and each are the mother tongue of around 1.5% of the
population respectively.[197]  Russian and English play significant roles as second or third languages of education and
communication.[citation needed]  There are a dozen other minority languages spoken natively in the country.[198]  Avar, Budukh,
[199]  Georgian, Juhuri,[199]  Khinalug,[199]  Kryts,[199]  Lezgian, Rutul,[199]  Talysh, Tat,[199]  Tsakhur,[199]  and Udi[199] 
are all spoken by small minorities. Some of these language communities are very small and their numbers are decreasing.[200] 
Armenian is almost exclusively spoken in the break-away Nagorno-Karabakh region.

RELIGION
Religions in Azerbaijan[201]Islam97.4%Christianity1.1%None1.0%Others0.5%Main articles: Religion in Azerbaijan  and Freedom of
religion in Azerbaijan
The Bibi-Heybat Mosque  before its destruction by the Bolsheviks  in 1936. The mosque was built over the tomb of a descendant of 
Muhammad.[202]Around 98% of the population are Muslims.[203]  92% of the Muslims are Shia Muslims  and 8% Sunni Muslims,[204]  and the Republic
of Azerbaijan has the second highest Shia population percentage in the world.[205]  Other faiths are practised by the country's
various ethnic groups. Under article 48 of its Constitution, Azerbaijan is a secular state  and ensures religious freedom. In a
2006–2008 Gallup  poll, only 21% of respondents from Azerbaijan stated that religion is an important part of their daily lives.
[206]

Of the nation's religious minorities, Christians who estimated 280,000 (3.1%)[207]  are mostly Russian  and Georgian  Orthodox 
and Armenian Apostolic  (almost all Armenians live in the break-away region of Nagorno-Karabakh).[96]  In 2003, there were 250 
Roman Catholics.[208]  Other Christian denominations as of 2002 include Lutherans, Baptists  and Molokans.[209]  There is also a
small ethnic Azerbaijani  Protestant  community.[210][211]  Azerbaijan also has an ancient Jewish  population with a 2,500-year
history; Jewish organizations estimate that 10,000–20,000 Jews remain in Azerbaijan.[212][213][214][215]  Azerbaijan also is home
to members of the Bahá'í, Hare Krishna  and Jehovah's Witnesses  communities, as well as adherents of the other religious
communities.[209]  Some religious communities have been unofficially restricted from religious freedom. A U.S. State Department 
report on the matter mentions detention of members of certain Muslim and Christian groups, and many groups have difficulty
registering with the SCWRA.[216]

EDUCATION
Main article: Education in Azerbaijan
Classroom in Dunya SchoolA relatively high percentage of Azerbaijanis have obtained some form of higher education, most notably in
scientific and technical subjects.[217]  In the Soviet era, literacy and average education levels rose dramatically from their
very low starting point, despite two changes in the standard alphabet, from Perso-Arabic script  to Latin  in the 1920s and from
Roman to Cyrillic  in the 1930s. According to Soviet data, 100 percent of males and females (ages nine to forty-nine) were
literate in 1970.[217]  According to the United Nations Development Program  Report 2009, the literacy rate in Azerbaijan is 99.5
percent.[218]

Since independence, one of the first laws that Azerbaijan's Parliament passed to disassociate itself from the Soviet Union was to
adopt a modified-Latin alphabet  to replace Cyrillic.[219]  Other than that the Azerbaijani system has undergone little structural
change. Initial alterations have included the reestablishment of religious education (banned during the Soviet period) and
curriculum changes that have reemphasized the use of the Azerbaijani language and have eliminated ideological content. In addition
to elementary schools, the education institutions include thousands of preschools, general secondary schools, and vocational
schools, including specialized secondary schools and technical schools. Education through the eighth grade is compulsory.

CULTURE
The Azerbaijani carpet  and Kalaghai, a UNESCO  Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage of Humanity.Main articles: Culture of
Azerbaijan  and Literature of AzerbaijanThe culture of Azerbaijan has developed as a result of many influences. Today, national
traditions are well preserved in the country despite Western influences, including globalized  on consumer culture. Some of the
main elements of the Azerbaijani culture are: music, literature, folk dances and art, cuisine, architecture, cinematography and 
Novruz Bayram. The latter is derived from the traditional celebration of the New Year in the ancient Iranian religion of 
Zoroastrianism. Novruz is a family holiday.[220]

Azerbaijan folk consists of Azerbaijanis, the representative part of society, as well as of nations and ethnic groups, compactly
living in various areas of the country. Azerbaijani national and traditional dresses are the Chokha  and Papakhi. There are radio
broadcasts in Russian, Armenian, Georgian, Kurdish, Lezgian  and Talysh  languages, which are financed from the state budget.[194] 
 Some local radio stations in Balakan  and Khachmaz  organize broadcasts in Avar  and Tat.[194]  In Baku several newspapers are
published in Russian, Kurdish (Dengi Kurd), Lezgian (Samur) and Talysh languages.[194]  Jewish society "Sokhnut" publishes the
newspaper Aziz.[194]

MUSIC AND FOLK DANCES
Main articles: Music of Azerbaijan  and Azerbaijani dancesUzeyir Hajibeyov  merged traditional Azerbaijani music  with Western
styles in the early 20th century.Music of Azerbaijan builds on folk traditions  that reach back nearly a thousand years.[221]  For centuries Azerbaijani music has
evolved under the badge of monody, producing rhythmically diverse melodies.[222]  Azerbaijani music has a branchy mode  system,
where chromatization  of major and minor  scales  is of great importance.[222]  Among national musical instruments there are 14 
string instruments, eight percussion instruments and six wind instruments.[223]  According to The Grove Dictionary of Music and
Musicians, "in terms of ethnicity, culture and religion the Azerbaijani are musically much closer to Iran than Turkey."[224]

The Azerbaijani Mugam, a UNESCO  Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage of Humanity, 16th-century miniature of Nizami Ganjavi's 
Khosrow and Shirin  tragic romance.Mugham, meykhana  and ashiq art  are among the many musical traditions of Azerbaijan. Mugham is usually a suite with poetry and
instrumental interludes. When performing mugham, the singers have to transform their emotions into singing and music. In contrast
to the mugham traditions of Central Asian countries, Azerbaijani mugham is more free-form and less rigid; it is often compared to
the improvised field of jazz.[225]  UNESCO  proclaimed the Azerbaijani mugham tradition a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible
Heritage of Humanity  on 7 November 2003. Meykhana is a kind of traditional Azerbaijani distinctive folk unaccompanied song,
usually performed by several people improvising on a particular subject.

Ashiq combines poetry, storytelling, dance and vocal and instrumental music into a traditional performance art that stands as a
symbol of Azerbaijani culture. It is a mystic troubadour or traveling bard who sings and plays the saz. This tradition has its
origin in the Shamanistic  beliefs of ancient Turkic peoples.[226]  Ashiqs' songs are semi-improvised around common bases.
Azerbaijan's ashiq art was included in the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage  by the UNESCO on 30 September 2009.[227]

Since the mid-1960s, Western-influenced Azerbaijani pop music, in its various forms, that has been growing in popularity in
Azerbaijan, while genres as rock  and hip hop  of alternative music genres are encouraged. Azerbaijani pop and Azerbaijani folk
music  arose with the international popularity of performers like Alim Qasimov, Rashid Behbudov, Vagif Mustafazadeh, Muslim
Magomayev, Shovkat Alakbarova  and Rubaba Muradova.[228]  Azerbaijan is an enthusiastic participant in the Eurovision Song
Contest. Azerbaijan made its debut appearance at the 2008 Eurovision Song Contest. The country's entry  gained the third place in
2009 and fifth the following year.[229]  Ell and Nikki  won the first place at the Eurovision Song Contest 2011  with the song "
Running Scared", entitling Azerbaijan to host the contest in 2012, in Baku.[230][231]  They have never missed a Grand Final.

There are dozens of Azerbaijani folk dances. They are performed at formal celebrations and the dancers wear national clothes like
the Chokha, which is well-preserved within the national dances. Most dances have a very fast rhythm. The national dance shows the
characteristics of the Azerbaijani nation.

LITERATURE
Main article: Azerbaijani literature
Painting of Khurshidbanu Natavan, one of the most distinguished Azerbaijani poets. She was also the daughter of the last ruler of
the Karabakh Khanate.Among the medieval authors born within the territorial limits of modern Azerbaijani Republic was Persian poet
and philosopher Nizami, called Ganjavi after his place of birth, Ganja, who was the author of the Khamseh  ("The Quintuplet"),
composed of five romantic poems, including "The Treasure of Mysteries," "Khosrow and Shīrīn," and "Leyli and Mejnūn."[232]

The earliest known figure in Azerbaijani literature was Izzeddin Hasanoglu, who composed a divan  consisting of Persian and Turkic
 ghazals.[233][234]  In Persian ghazals he used his pen-name, while his Turkic ghazals were composed under his own name of
Hasanoghlu.[233]

Classical literature in Azerbaijani was formed in 14th century based on the various dialect Early Middle Ages dialects of Tabriz 
and Shirvan. Among the poets of this period were Gazi Burhanaddin, Haqiqi  (pen-name of Jahan-shah Qara Qoyunlu), and Habibi.[235] 
 The end of the 14th century was also the period of starting literary activity of Imadaddin Nesimi,[236]  one of the greatest 
Turkic[237][238][239]  Hurufi  mystical poets of the late 14th and early 15th centuries[240]  and one of the most prominent early
divan masters in Turkic literary history,[240]  who also composed poetry in Persian[238][241]  and Arabic.[240]  The divan and
ghazal styles were further developed by poets Qasim al-Anvar, Fuzuli  and Khatai  (pen-name of Safavid  Shah Ismail I).

The Book of Dede Korkut  consists of two manuscripts copied in the 16th century,[242]  was not written earlier than the 15th
century.[243][244]  It is a collection of 12 stories reflecting the oral tradition of Oghuz nomads.[244]  The 16th-century poet,
Muhammed Fuzuli produced his timeless philosophical and lyrical Qazals  in Arabic, Persian, and Azerbaijani. Benefiting immensely
from the fine literary traditions of his environment, and building upon the legacy of his predecessors, Fizuli was destined to
become the leading literary figure of his society. His major works include The Divan of Ghazals  and The Qasidas. In the same
century, Azerbaijani literature further flourished with the development of Ashik  (Azerbaijani: Aşıq) poetic genre of bards.
During the same period, under the pen-name of Khatāī (Arabic: خطائی‎‎ for sinner) Shah Ismail I wrote about 1400 verses in
Azerbaijani,[245]  which were later published as his Divan. A unique literary style known as qoshma  (Azerbaijani: qoşma  for 
improvization) was introduced in this period, and developed by Shah Ismail and later by his son and successor, Shah Tahmasp I.

In the span of the 17th and 18th centuries, Fizuli's unique genres as well Ashik  poetry were taken up by prominent poets and
writers such as Qovsi of Tabriz, Shah Abbas Sani, Agha Mesih Shirvani, Nishat, Molla Vali Vidadi, Molla Panah Vagif, Amani, Zafar 
and others. Along with Turks, Turkmens  and Uzbeks, Azerbaijanis  also celebrate the Epic of Koroglu  (from Azerbaijani: kor oğlu 
for blind man's son), a legendary folk hero.[246]  Several documented versions of Koroglu epic remain at the Institute for
Manuscripts of the National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan.[234]

Modern literature in Azerbaijan is based on the Shirvani dialect mainly, while in Iran it is based on the Tabrizi one. The first
newspaper in Azerbaijani, Akinchi  was published in 1875. In the mid-19th century, it was taught in the schools of Baku, Ganja, 
Shaki, Tbilisi, and Yerevan. Since 1845, it has also been taught in the University of Saint Petersburg  in Russia.

FOLK ART
Main article: Azerbaijani folk art
Traditional Azerbaijani clothing and musical instruments.Azerbaijanis have a rich and distinctive culture, a major part of which
is decorative  and applied art. This form of art is represented by a wide range of handicrafts, such as chasing, jeweler,
engraving in metal, carving in wood, stone and bone, carpet-making, lasing, pattern weaving and printing, knitting and embroidery.
Each of these types of decorative art, evidence of the and endowments of the Azerbaijan nation, is very much in favor here. Many
interesting facts pertaining to the development of arts and crafts in Azerbaijan were reported by numerous merchants, travelers
and diplomats who had visited these places at different times.

The Azerbaijani carpet  is a traditional handmade textile of various sizes, with dense texture and a pile or pile-less surface,
whose patterns are characteristic of Azerbaijan's many carpet-making regions. In November 2010 the Azerbaijani carpet was
proclaimed a Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage  by UNESCO.[247][248]

Handwork coppery in Lahic.Azerbaijan has been since the ancient times known as a center of a large variety of crafts. The
archeological dig on the territory of Azerbaijan testifies to the well developed agriculture, stock raising, metal working,
pottery, ceramics, and carpet-weaving that date as far back as to the 2nd millennium BC. Archeological sites in Dashbulaq,
Hasansu, Zayamchai, and Tovuzchai uncovered from the BTC pipeline have revealed early Iron Age artifacts.[249]

Azerbaijani carpets can be categorized under several large groups and a multitude of subgroups. Scientific research of the
Azerbaijani carpet is connected with the name of Latif Kerimov, a prominent scientist and artist. It was his classification that
related the four large groups of carpets with the four geographical zones of Azerbaijan, Guba-Shirvan, Ganja-Kazakh, Karabakh and
Tabriz.[250]

CUISINE
Main article: Azerbaijani cuisineDushbara, a traditional Azerbaijani meal.The traditional cuisine is famous for an abundance of
vegetables and greens used seasonally in the dishes. Fresh herbs, including mint, cilantro (coriander), dill, basil, parsley,
tarragon, leeks, chives, thyme, marjoram, green onion, and watercress, are very popular and often accompany main dishes on the
table. Climatic diversity and fertility of the land are reflected in the national dishes, which are based on fish from the 
Caspian
Sea, local meat (mainly mutton and beef), and an abundance of seasonal vegetables and greens. Saffron-rice plov  is the flagship
food in Azerbaijan and black tea  is the national beverage.[251]  Azerbaijanis often use traditional armudu  (pear-shaped) glass
as they have very strong tea culture.[252][253]  Popular traditional dishes include bozbash  (lamb soup that exists in several
regional varieties with the addition of different vegetables), qutab  (fried turnover with a filling of greens or minced meat) and
 dushbara  (sort of dumplings of dough filled with ground meat and flavor).

ARCHITECTURE
Main article: Architecture of AzerbaijanMomine Khatun Mausoleum  in Nakhchivan  built in the 12th centuryAzerbaijani architecture
typically combines elements of East  and West.[254]  Many ancient architectural treasures such as the Maiden Tower  and Palace of
the Shirvanshahs  in the Walled City of Baku  survive in modern Azerbaijan. Entries submitted on the UNESCO World Heritage 
tentative list include the Ateshgah of Baku, Momine Khatun Mausoleum, Hirkan National Park, Binegadi National Park, Lökbatan Mud
Volcano, Baku Stage Mountain, Caspian Shore Defensive Constructions, Shusha National Reserve, Ordubad National Reserve  and the 
Palace of Shaki Khans.[255][256]

Among other architectural treasures are Quadrangular Castle  in Mardakan, Parigala  in Yukhary Chardaglar, a number of bridges
spanning the Aras River, and several mausoleums. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, little monumental architecture was created,
but distinctive residences were built in Baku and elsewhere. Among the most recent architectural monuments, the Baku subways  are
noted for their lavish decor.[257]

The task for modern Azerbaijani architecture is diverse application of modern aesthetics, the search for an architect's own
artistic style and inclusion of the existing historico-cultural environment. Major projects such as Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center,
 Flame Towers, Baku Crystal Hall, Baku White City  and SOCAR Tower  have transformed the country's skyline and promotes its
contemporary identity.[258][259]

VISUAL ART
Main article: Visual arts of Azerbaijan
A miniature painting  of a battle scene on the walls of the Palace of Shaki Khans, 18th century, city of Shaki.Azerbaijani art
includes one of the oldest art objects in the world, which were discovered as Gamigaya Petroglyphs  in the territory of Ordubad
Rayon  are dated back to the 1st to 4th centuries BC. About 1500 dislodged and carved rock paintings with images of deer, goats,
bulls, dogs, snakes, birds, fantastic beings and also people, carriages and various symbols had been found out on basalt rocks.
[260]  Norwegian ethnographer  and adventurer Thor Heyerdahl  was convinced that people from the area went to Scandinavia  in
about 100 AD and took their boat building skills with them, and transmuted them into the Viking boats in Northern Europe.[261]
[262]

Over the centuries, Azerbaijani art has gone through many stylistic changes. Azerbaijani painting is traditionally characterized
by a warmth of colour and light, as exemplified in the works of Azim Azimzade  and Bahruz Kangarli, and a preoccupation with
religious figures and cultural motifs.[263]  Azerbaijani painting enjoyed preeminence in Caucasus for hundreds of years, from the 
Romanesque  and Ottoman  periods, and through the Soviet  and Baroque  periods, the latter two of which saw fruition in
Azerbaijan. Other notable artists who fall within these periods include Sattar Bahlulzade, Togrul Narimanbekov, Tahir Salahov, 
Alakbar Rezaguliyev, Mirza Gadim Iravani, Mikayil Abdullayev  and Boyukagha Mirzazade.[264]

CINEMA
Scene from the Azerbaijani film In the Kingdom of Oil and Millions, 1916Main articles: Cinema of Azerbaijan, Azerbaijani animation
, and Television in AzerbaijanThe film industry in Azerbaijan dates back to 1898. In fact, Azerbaijan was among the first
countries involved in cinematography.[265]  Therefore, it's not surprising that this apparatus soon showed up in Baku  – at the
start of the 20th century, this bay town on the Caspian  was producing more than 50 percent of the world's supply of oil. Just
like today, the oil industry attracted foreigners eager to invest and to work.[266]  In 1919, during the Azerbaijan Democratic
Republic, a documentary The Celebration of the Anniversary of Azerbaijani Independence  was filmed on Azerbaijan's independence
day, 28 May, and premiered in June 1919 at several theatres in Baku.[267]  After the Soviet power was established in 1920, Nariman
Narimanov, Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of Azerbaijan, signed a decree nationalizing Azerbaijan's cinema. This also
influenced the creation of Azerbaijani animation.[267]

In 1991, after Azerbaijan gained its independence from the Soviet Union, the first Baku International Film Festival East-West was
held in Baku. In December 2000, the former President of Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev, signed a decree proclaiming 2 August to be the
professional holiday of filmmakers of Azerbaijan. Today Azerbaijani filmmakers are again dealing with issues similar to those
faced by cinematographers prior to the establishment of the Soviet Union in 1920. Once again, both choice of content and
sponsorship of films are largely left up to the initiative of the filmmaker.[265]

MEDIA AND MEDIA FREEDOM
Main articles: Media of Azerbaijan  and Media freedom in AzerbaijanThere are three state-owned television channels: AzTV, Idman TV  and Medeniyyet TV. One public channel and 6 private channels: 
İctimai Television, ANS TV, Space TV, Lider TV, Azad Azerbaijan TV, Xazar TV  and Region TV.

Print and broadcast media in Azerbaijan are almost wholly under control of the ruling Aliyev family, eventually through friendly
intermediaries.[268]  Ownership opacity is backed by law. Azerbaijan hosts 9 national TV stations (of which a public service
broadcaster and 3 more state-run channels), over 12 regional TV stations, 25 radio channels, over 30 daily newspapers. Opposition
media manages to work on the perpetual brink of survival.[269]

HUMAN RIGHTS IN AZERBAIJAN
Main article: Human rights in AzerbaijanThe Constitution of Azerbaijan  claims to guarantee freedom of speech, but this is denied in practice. After several years of
decline in press and media freedom, in 2014 the media environment in Azerbaijan deteriorated fast under a governmental campaign to
silence any opposition and criticism, even while the country led the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe 
(May–November 2014). Spurious legal charges and impunity in violence against journalists have remained the norm.[270]  All foreign
broadcasts are banned in the country.[269]

According to the 2013 Freedom House  Freedom of the Press report, Azerbaijan's press freedom status is "not free," and Azerbaijan
ranks 177th out of 196 countries.[271]

BBC, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty  and Voice of America  are banned in Azerbaijan.[272]

During the last few years, three journalists were killed and several prosecuted in trials described as unfair by international
human rights organizations. Azerbaijan has the biggest number of journalists imprisoned in Europe and Central Asia in 2015,
according to the Committee to Protect Journalists, and is the 5th most censored country in the world, ahead of Iran and China.
[273]

A report by an Amnesty International  researcher in October 2015 points to '...the severe deterioration of human rights in
Azerbaijan over the past few years. Sadly Azerbaijan has been allowed to get away with unprecedented levels of repression and in
the process almost wipe out its civil society'.[274]  Amnesty's 2015/16 annual report[275]  on the country stated ' ...
persecution of political dissent continued. Human rights organizations remained unable to resume their work. At least 18 prisoners
of conscience remained in detention at the end of the year. Reprisals against independent journalists and activists persisted both
in the country and abroad, while their family members also faced harassment and arrests. International human rights monitors were
barred and expelled from the country. Reports of torture and other ill-treatment persisted.'

SPORTS
Main article: Sport in AzerbaijanShakhriyar Mamedyarov  was the 2013 World Rapid Chess  and two-time European Team Chess 
champion.Sport in Azerbaijan has ancient roots, and even now, both traditional and modern sports are still practiced. Freestyle wrestling 
has been traditionally regarded as Azerbaijan's national sport, in which Azerbaijan won up to fourteen medals, including four
golds since joining the National Olympic Committee. Currently, the most popular sports include football  and chess.[276]

Football is the most popular sport in Azerbaijan, and the Association of Football Federations of Azerbaijan  with 9,122 registered
players, is the largest sporting association in the country.[277][278]  The national football team  of Azerbaijan demonstrates
relatively low performance in the international arena compared to the nation football clubs. The most successful Azerbaijani
football clubs are Neftchi Baku, Inter Baku, Qarabağ, and Khazar Lankaran. In 2012, Neftchi Baku became the first Azerbaijani team
to advance to the group stage of a European competition, beating APOEL  of Cyprus 4-2 on aggregate in the play-off round of the 
2012-13 UEFA Europa League.[279][280]  In 2014, Qarabağ became the second Azerbaijani club advancing to the group stage of UEFA
Europa League. Futsal  is another popular sport in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijan national futsal team  reached fourth place in the 
2010 UEFA Futsal Championship, while domestic club Araz Naxçivan  clinched bronze medals at the 2009–10 UEFA Futsal Cup  and 
2013–14 UEFA Futsal Cup.[281]  Azerbaijan is the main sponsor of Spanish football club Atlético de Madrid, a partnership that the
club describes should 'promote the image of Azerbaijan in the world'.[282]

Azerbaijan is one of the traditional powerhouses of world chess,[283]  having hosted many international chess tournaments and
competitions and became European Team Chess Championship  winners in 2009 and 2013.[284][285][286]  Notable chess players from
country's chess schools that made a great impact on the game in world, includes Teimour Radjabov, Shahriyar Mammadyarov, Vladimir
Makogonov, Vugar Gashimov  and former World Chess Champion  Garry Kasparov. As of 2014[update], country's home of Shamkir Chess  a
category 22 event and one of the highest rated tournaments of all time.[287]  Backgammon  also plays a major role in Azerbaijani
culture.[288]  The game is very popular in Azerbaijan and is widely played among the local public.[289]  There are also different
variations of backgammon developed and analyzed by Azerbaijani experts.[290]

Baku National Stadium  was used for the first European Games  in June 2015.Azerbaijan is one of the leading volleyball countries
in the world and its Azerbaijan Women's Volleyball Super League  is one of strongest women leagues in world. Its women's national
team came fourth at the 2005 European Championship.[291]  Over the last years, clubs like Rabita Baku  and Azerrail Baku  achieved
great success at European cups.[292]  Azerbaijani volleyball players include likes of Valeriya Korotenko, Oksana Parkhomenko, 
Inessa Korkmaz, Natalya Mammadova  and Alla Hasanova.

Azerbaijan has a Formula One race-track  and country hosted its first Formula One  Grand Prix on 19 June 2016.[293]

Other well-known Azerbaijani athletes are Namig Abdullayev, Toghrul Asgarov, Rovshan Bayramov, Sharif Sharifov, Mariya Stadnik 
and Farid Mansurov  in wrestling, Elnur Mammadli, Elkhan Mammadov  and Nazim Huseynov  in judo, Rafael Aghayev  in karate, 
Magomedrasul Majidov  and Aghasi Mammadov  in boxing, Nizami Pashayev  in Olympic weightlifting, Azad Asgarov  in pankration, 
Eduard Mammadov  in kickboxing, and K-1  fighter Zabit Samedov. Azerbaijan has recently employed a number of top Iranian athletes
and coaches to its national teams by granting them Azerbaijani nationalities. These include Saman Tahmasebi, Sabah Shariati and
Jamshid Kheyrabadi in wrestling; and Reza Mehmandoost and Milad Beigi in Taekwando.[294]

Azerbaijan hosted several major sport competitions in last decade, including the 2013 F1 Powerboat World Championship, 2012 FIFA
U-17 Women's World Cup, 2011 AIBA World Boxing Championships, 2010 European Wrestling Championships, 2009 Rhythmic Gymnastics
European Championships, 2014 European Taekwondo Championships.[295]  On 8 December 2012, Baku  was selected to host the 2015
European Games, the first to be held in competition's history.[296]  The most important annual sporting events held in the country
are Baku Cup  and Tour d'Azerbaïdjan  cycling race.

SEE ALSO
 * Azerbaijan portal
 * Asia portal

 * Book: Azerbaijan

 * Outline of Azerbaijan
 * Index of Azerbaijan-related articles

REFERENCES
 1.   ^  "Azərbaycanda Əhalinin Sayı Açıqlandı" [Population of Azerbaijan Announced]  (in Azerbaijani). 15 December 2014.
 2.   ^ a  b  c  d  "Azerbaijan". International Monetary Fund.
 3.   ^  "Gini Index". World Bank. Retrieved 2 March  2011.
 4.   ^  "Human Development Index, 2012 Update". United Nations. 2011. Retrieved 15 June  2012.
 5.   ^  While often politically aligned with Europe, Azerbaijan is generally considered to be at least mostly in Southwest Asia
      geographically with its northern part bisected by the standard Asia-Europe divide, the Greater Caucasus. The United Nations 
      classification of world regions  places Azerbaijan in Western Asia; the CIA World Factbook  places it mostly in Southwest
      Asia [1]  and Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary  places it in both; NationalGeographic.com, and Encyclopædia
      Britannica  also place Georgia in Asia. Conversely, some sources place Azerbaijan in Europe such as Worldatlas.com.
 6.   ^ a  b  c  d  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (1995). Russia and Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition. Columbia University Press.
      pp. 69, 133. ISBN978-0-231-07068-3.
 7.   ^  Pipes, Richard  (1997). The Formation of the Soviet Union: Communism and Nationalism 1917–1923  (2nd ed.). Cambridge,
      Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp. 218–220, 229. ISBN978-0-674-30951-7.
 8.   ^  King, David C. (2006). Azerbaijan. Marshall Cavendish. p. 27. ISBN978-0761420118.
 9.   ^  Zürcher, Christoph (2007). The Post-Soviet Wars: Rebellion, Ethnic Conflict, and Nationhood in the Caucasus
      ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). New York: New York University Press. p. 168. ISBN978-0814797099.
 10.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 822 от 30 апреля 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Archived from the original  on 3 May 2011.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 11.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 853 от 29 июля 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 12.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 874 14 октября 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Archived from the original  on 3 May 2011.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 13.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 884 от 12 ноября 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 14.  ^ a  b  c  d  "Azerbaijan: Membership of international groupings/organisations". British Foreign & Commonwealth Office. 
      Archived  from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 15.  ^  Europa Publications Limited (1998). Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States. Routledge. p. 154. ISBN
      978-1-85743-058-5.
 16.  ^ a  b  "Elections & Appointments – Human Rights Council". United Nations. Archived  from the original on 20 December 2008.
      Retrieved 3 January  2009.
 17.  ^  "The non-aligned engagement". The Jakarta Post. Retrieved 26 May  2011.
 18.  ^  Cornell, Svante E. (2010). Azerbaijan Since Independence. M.E. Sharpe. pp. 165, 284. Indicative of general regional
      trends and a natural reemergence of previously oppressed religious identity, an increasingly popular ideological basis for
      the pursuit of political objectives has been Islam.... The government, for its part, has shown an official commitment to
      Islam by building mosques and respecting Islamic values... Unofficial Islamic groups sought to use aspects of Islam to
      mobilize the population and establish the foundations for a future political struggle.... Unlike Turkey, Azerbaijan does not
      have the powerful ideological legacy of secularism... the conflict with Armenia has bred frustration that is increasingly
      being answered by a combined Islamic and nationalist sentiment, especially among younger people... All major political
      forces are committed to secularism and are based, if anything, on a nationalist agenda.
 19.  ^  "Human Development Index and its components"  (PDF). United Nations Development Programme.
 20.  ^  "Interactive Infographic of the World's Best Countries". Newsweek. 15 August 2010. Archived  from the original on 22 July
      2011. Retrieved 24 July  2011.
 21.  ^  "Literacy rate among schoolchildren in Azerbaijan is 100% – UN report". News.Az. 28 October 2011.
 22.  ^  "Employment statistics in Azerbaijan". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Retrieved 26 May 
      2007.
 23.  ^  "Azerbaijan and the 2013 presidential election"  (PDF). UK Parliament briefing papers. 25 October 2013.
 24.  ^  "2012 Corruption Perceptions Index – Results". Transparency International. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 25.  ^  "Introduction: Azerbaijan". CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 6 March  2014.
 26.  ^  "Human Rights Watch: Azerbaijan". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved 6 March  2014.
 27.  ^  Houtsma, M. Th.  (1993). First Encyclopaedia of Islam 1913–1936  (reprint ed.). BRILL. ISBN978-90-04-09796-4.
 28.  ^  Schippmann, Klaus (1989). Azerbaijan: Pre-Islamic History. Encyclopædia Iranica. pp. 221–224. ISBN978-0-933273-95-5.
 29.  ^  Minahan, James (1998). Miniature Empires: A Historical Dictionary of the Newly Independent States. Greenwood Publishing
      Group. p. 20. ISBN978-0-313-30610-5.
 30.  ^  Chamoux, François (2003). Hellenistic Civilization. John Wiley and Sons. p. 26. ISBN978-0-631-22241-5.
 31.  ^  Bosworth A.B., Baynham E.J. (2002). Alexander the Great in Fact and fiction. Oxford University Press. p. 92. ISBN
      978-0-19-925275-6.
 32.  ^ a  b  Nevertheless, "despite being one of the chief vassals of Sasanian Shahanshah, the Albanian king had only a semblance
      of authority, and the Sassanid marzban  (military governor) held most civil, religious, and military authority.
 33.  ^ a  b  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (1999). Historical Dictionary of Azerbaijan. Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press. ISBN
      978-0-8108-3550-4.
 34.  ^  Darmesteter, James  (2004). "Frawardin Yasht". Avesta Khorda Avesta: Book Of Common Prayer  (reprint ed.). Kessinger
      Publishing. p. 93. ISBN978-1-4191-0852-5.
 35.  ^ a  b  c  "Azerbaijan: Early History: Iranian and Greek Influences". U.S. Library of Congress. Retrieved 7 June  2006.
 36.  ^In dictionariesF. Steingass: * āẕar-bād-gān
       * āẕar-abād-gūn
       * āẕar, āẕur
       * ādar
       * bāygān
       * pāy
      
      Dehkhoda: * آذربایجان/Âzarbâyjân  Archived  20 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آذربایگان/Âzarbâygân  Archived  16 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آذربادگان/Âzarbâdegân[permanent dead link]
       * آذر/Âzar  Archived  24 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آدر/Âdar  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * بایگان/Bâygân  Archived  27 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * بادگان/Bâdegân  Archived  10 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
       * -پای/pây-  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * گان-/-gân  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * جان-/-jân  Archived  28 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine. (Persian)
      
      
 37.  ^  Touraj Atabaki. Iran and the First World War: Battleground of the Great Powers'  I.B.Tauris, 4 September 2006 ISBN
      978-1860649646  p 132
 38.  ^  Yilmaz, Harun (2015). National Identities in Soviet Historiography: The Rise of Nations Under Stalin. Routledge. p. 21. 
      ISBN978-1317596646. On May 27, the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan (DRA) was declared with Ottoman military support. The
      rulers of the DRA refused to identify themselves as [Transcaucasian] Tatar, which they rightfully considered to be a Russian
      colonial definition. (...) Neighboring Iran did not welcome did not welcome the DRA's adoptation of the name of "Azerbaijan"
      for the country because it could also refer to Iranian Azerbaijan and implied a territorial claim.
 39.  ^  Barthold, Vasily (1963). Sochineniya, vol II/1. Moscow. p. 706. (...) whenever it is necessary to choose a name that will
      encompass all regions of the republic of Azerbaijan, name Arran  can be chosen. But the term Azerbaijan was chosen because
      when the Azerbaijan republic was created, it was assumed that this and the Persian Azerbaijan  will be one entity, because
      the population of both has a big similarity. On this basis, the word Azerbaijan was chosen. Of course right now when the
      word Azerbaijan is used, it has two meanings as Persian Azerbaijan and as a republic, its confusing and a question rises as
      to which Azerbaijan is talked about.  |access-date=  requires |url=  (help)
 40.  ^ a  b  Atabaki, Touraj (2000). Azerbaijan: Ethnicity and the Struggle for Power in Iran. I.B.Tauris. p. 25. ISBN
      9781860645549.
 41.  ^ a  b  c  Dekmejian, R. Hrair; Simonian, Hovann H. (2003). Troubled Waters: The Geopolitics of the Caspian Region. I.B.
      Tauris. p. 60. ISBN978-1860649226. Until 1918, when the Musavat regime decided to name the newly independent state
      Azerbaijan, this designation had been used exclusively to identify the Iranian province of Azerbaijan.
 42.  ^ a  b  c  Rezvani, Babak (2014). Ethno-territorial conflict and coexistence in the caucasus, Central Asia and Fereydan:
      academisch proefschrift. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. p. 356. ISBN978-9048519286. The region to the north of the
      river Araxes was not called Azerbaijan prior to 1918, unlike the region in northwestern Iran that has been called since so
      long ago.
 43.  ^  Fragner, B.G. (2001). Soviet Nationalism: An Ideological Legacy to the Independant Republics of Central Asia. I.B. Tauris
      and Company. pp. 13–32. In the post Islamic sense, Arran and Shirvan  are often distinguished, while in the pre-Islamic era,
      Arran or the western Caucasian Albania  roughly corresponds to the modern territory of the republic of Azerbaijan. In the 
      Soviet  era, in a breathtaking manipulation, historical Azerbaijan  (northwestern Iran) was reinterpreted as "South
      Azerbaijan" in order for the Soviets to lay territorial claim on historical Azerbaijan proper which is located in modern-day
      northwestern Iran.  |access-date=  requires |url=  (help)
 44.  ^  Azakov, Siyavush. "National report on institutional landscape and research policy Social Sciences and Humanities in
      Azerbaijan"  (PDF). Institute of Physics. Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 45.  ^  Chaumont, M. L. (1984). "Albania". Encyclopædia Iranica.
 46.  ^  Maps and accompanying commentary in Hewsen, Robert H. Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
      2001: map 19 (Orontid Armenia, p. 33), map 20 (Empire of Tigranes the Great, p. 34, map 21 (Artaxiad Armenia, p. 35), map 27
      (Arsakid Armenia, p. 45
 47.  ^  A. E. Redgate. The Armenians. Blackwell Publishers. Oxford. Maps 2.1, 7.2, 8.2
 48.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001, p. 102.
 49.  ^  Robert H. Hewsen. Ethno-history and the Armenian influence upon the Caucasian Albanians. Classical Armenian culture:
      Influence and creativity, Scholars press, Philadelphia, 1982, p.33.
 50.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (2001). "Armenia: a Historical Atlas". Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  Missing or empty |url=  (
      
      help)  map Caucasian Albania
 51.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (1982). Thomas J. Samuelian, ed. "Ethno-History and the Armenian Influence upon the Caucasian
      Albanians". Classical Armenian Culture: Influences and Creativity. (Philadelphia: Scholars Press. p. 45.  Missing or empty 
      |url=  (help)
 52.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (2001). Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 32–33, map 19 (shows the
      territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh as part of the Orontids' Kingdom of Armenia).
 53.  ^  Моисей Хоренский. Армянская География VII в. Перевод Патканова К.П. СПб., 1877. стр. 40,17
 54.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. "The Kingdom of Artsakh," in T. Samuelian & M. Stone, eds. Medieval Armenian Culture. Chico, CA, 1983
 55.  ^  Yarshater, E. (1987). "The Iranian Language of Azerbaijan". Encyclopædia Iranica. III/2.
 56.  ^  Ludwig, Paul (1998). Proceedings of the Third European Conference of Iranian Studies. 1  (Nicholas Sims-Williams (ed.)
      ed.). Cambridge: Wiesbaden: Reichert. ISBN978-3-89500-070-6.
 57.  ^  Roy, Olivier (2007). The new Central Asia: geopolitics and the birth of nations  (reprint ed.). I.B. Tauris. p. 6. ISBN
      978-1-84511-552-4.
 58.  ^  R. Ward, Steven (2009). Immortal: a military history of Iran and its armed forces. Georgetown University Press. p. 43. 
      ISBN978-1-58901-258-5.
 59.  ^  Malcolm Wagstaff, John (1985). The evolution of middle eastern landscapes: an outline to A.D. 1840, Part 1840. Rowman &
      Littlefield. p. 205. ISBN978-0-389-20577-7.
 60.  ^  L. Altstadt, Audrey (1992). The Azerbaijani Turks: power and identity under Russian rule. Hoover Press. p. 5. ISBN
      978-0-8179-9182-1.
 61.  ^  Akiner, Shirin  (2004). The Caspian: politics, energy and security. RoutledgeCurzon. p. 158. ISBN978-0-7007-0501-6.
 62.  ^  Shirin Akiner (2004). The Caspian. Taylor & Francis. ISBN9780203641675. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 63.  ^  "In Safavi times, Azerbaijan was applied to all the muslim-ruled khanates of the eastern Caucasian as well, as to the
      area south of the Araz River as far as the Qezel Uzan River, the latter region being approximately the same as the modern
      Iranian ostans of East and West Azerbaijan."Atkin, Muriel (1980). Russia and Iran, 1780–1828. University of Minnesota Press.
      p. xi. ISBN978-0-8166-5697-4.
 64.  ^  Walker, Christopher J. (1980). Armenia, the survival of a nation. Croom Helm. p. 45. Tsitsianov next moved against the
      semi-independent Iranian khanates. On the thinnest of pretexts he captured the Muslim town of Gandja, the seat of Islamic
      learning in the Caucasus (...)
 65.  ^  Saparov, Arsène (2014). From Conflict to Autonomy in the Caucasus: The Soviet Union and the Making of Abkhazia, South
      Ossetia and Nagorno Karabakh. Routledge. ISBN978-1317637837. Even though these principalities [the khanates] had not been
      under Iranian suzerainty since the assasination of Nadir Shah  in 1747, they were traditionally considered an inalienable
      part of Iranian domains. (...) To the semi-independent Caucasian principalities the appearance of the new Great Power (...)
 66.  ^  Kashani-Sabet, Firoozeh (May 1997). "Fragile Frontiers: The Diminishing Domains of Qajar Iran". International Journal of
      Middle East Studies. 29  (2): 210. doi:10.1017/s0020743800064473. In 1795, Ibrahim Khalil Khan, the wali of Qarabagh, warned
      Sultan Selim III of Aqa Muhammad Khan's ambitions. Fearing for his independence, he informed the Sultan of Aqa Muhammad
      Khan's ability to subdue Azerbaijan and later Qarabagh, Erivan, and Georgia.
 67.  ^  Barker, Adele Marie; Grant, Bruce (2010). The Russia Reader: History, Culture, Politics. Duke University Press. p. 253. 
      ISBN978-0822346487. But they were relatively more accessible given the organization of small, centralized, semi-independent
      khanates that functioned through the decline of Iranian rule after the death of Nadir Shah in the mid-eighteenth century
      (...)
 68.  ^  Avery, Peter; Hambly, Gavin (1991). The Cambridge History of Iran. Cambridge University Press. p. 126. ISBN
      978-0-521-20095-0. Agha Muhammad Khan could now turn to the restoration of the outlying provinces of the Safavid kingdom.
      Returning to Tehran in the spring of 1795, he assembled a force of some 60,000 cavalry and infantry and in Shawwal
      Dhul-Qa'da/May, set off for Azarbaijan, intending to conquer the country between the rivers Aras and Kura, formerly under
      Safavid control. This region comprised a number of khanates of which the most important was Qarabagh, with its capital at
      Shusha; Ganja, with its capital of the same name; Shirvan across the Kura, with its capital at Shamakhi; and to the
      north-west, on both banks of the Kura, Christian Georgia (Gurjistan), with its capital at Tiflis.
 69.  ^  Encyclopedia of Soviet law By Ferdinand Joseph Maria Feldbrugge, Gerard Pieter van den Berg, William B. Simons, Page 457
 70.  ^  King, Charles  (2008). The ghost of freedom: a history of the Caucasus. University of Michigan. p. 10. ISBN
      978-0-19-517775-6.
 71.  ^  Ga ́bor A ́goston,Bruce Alan Masters. Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire  Infobase Publishing, 1 January 2009 ISBN
      1438110251  p 125
 72.  ^  Multiple Authors. "Caucasus and Iran". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 3 September  2012.
 73.  ^  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (2004). Russian Azerbaijan, 1905–1920: The Shaping of a National Identity in a Muslim Community.
      Cambridge University Press. p. 5. ISBN978-0-521-52245-8.
 74.  ^ a  b  Timothy C. Dowling Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond  pp 728–729
      ABC-CLIO, 2 December 2014 ISBN 1598849484
 75.  ^  L. Batalden, Sandra (1997). The newly independent states of Eurasia: handbook of former Soviet republics. Greenwood
      Publishing Group. p. 98. ISBN978-0-89774-940-4.
 76.  ^  E. Ebel, Robert, Menon, Rajan (2000). Energy and conflict in Central Asia and the Caucasus. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 181.
       ISBN978-0-7425-0063-1.
 77.  ^  Andreeva, Elena (2010). Russia and Iran in the great game: travelogues and orientalism  (reprint ed.). Taylor & Francis.
      p. 6. ISBN978-0-415-78153-4.
 78.  ^  Çiçek, Kemal, Kuran, Ercüment (2000). The Great Ottoman-Turkish Civilisation. University of Michigan. ISBN
      978-975-6782-18-7.
 79.  ^  Ernest Meyer, Karl, Blair Brysac, Shareen (2006). Tournament of Shadows: The Great Game and the Race for Empire in
      Central Asia. Basic Books. p. 66. ISBN978-0-465-04576-1.
 80.  ^  Swietochowski, Tadeusz. Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia 2003  Taylor and Francis, 2003. ISBN 1857431375  p 104
 81.  ^  Russia and a Divided Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition, by Tadeusz Świętochowski, Columbia University Press, 1995,
      p. 66
 82.  ^  Smith, Michael (April 2001). "Anatomy of Rumor: Murder Scandal, the Musavat Party and Narrative of the Russian Revolution
      in Baku, 1917–1920". Journal of Contemporary History. 36  (2): 228. doi:10.1177/002200940103600202. The results of the March
      events were immediate and total for the Musavat. Several hundreds of its members were killed in the fighting; up to 12,000
      Muslim civilians perished; thousands of others fled Baku in a mass exodus
 83.  ^  Minahan, James B. Miniature Empires: A Historical Dictionary of the Newly Independent States. p. 22. ISBN0-313-30610-9. 
      The tensions and fighting between the Azerbaijanis and the Armenians in the federation culminated in the massacre of some
      12,000 Azerbaijanis in Baku by radical Armenians and Bolshevik troops in March 1918
 84.  ^  Michael Smith. "Pamiat' ob utratakh i Azerbaidzhanskoe obshchestvo/Traumatic Loss and Azerbaijani. National Memory". 
      Azerbaidzhan i Rossiia: obshchestva i gosudarstva (Azerbaijan and Russia: Societies and States)  (in Russian). Sakharov
      Center. Retrieved 21 August  2011.
 85.  ^ a  b  c  Kazemzadeh, Firuz (1951). The Struggle for Transcaucasia: 1917–1921. The New York Philosophical Library. pp. 124,
      222, 229, 269–270. ISBN978-0-8305-0076-5.
 86.  ^  Schulze, Reinhard. A Modern History of the Islamic World. I.B.Tauris, 2000. ISBN 978-1-86064-822-9.
 87.  ^  Горянин, Александр (28 August 2003). Очень черное золото  (in Russian). GlobalRus. Archived  from the original on 6
      September 2003. Retrieved 28 August  2003.
 88.  ^  Горянин, Александр. История города Баку. Часть 3.  (in Russian). Window2Baku.
 89.  ^  Pope, Hugh (2006). Sons of the conquerors: the rise of the Turkic world. New York: The Overlook Press. p. 116. ISBN
      978-1-58567-804-4.
 90.  ^  "Azerbaijan celebrates day of victory over fascism". "Contact.az". 9 May 2011. Retrieved 9 May  2011.
 91.  ^  "Victory over Nazis 'was impossible without Baku oil'". "AzerNEWS". 8 May 2010. Retrieved 8 May  2010.
 92.  ^  Michael P., Croissant (1998). The Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict: causes and implications. United States of America: Praeger
      Publishers. pp. 36, 37. ISBN0-275-96241-5.
 93.  ^  "Human Rights Watch. "Playing the "Communal Card": Communal Violence and Human Rights"". Human Rights Watch.
 94.  ^ a  b  "Milli Məclisin tarixi. Azərbaycan SSR Ali Soveti (1920–1991-ci illər)" [The history of Milli Majlis. Supreme
      Soviet
      of Azerbaijan SSR (1920–1991)]. Retrieved 1 December  2010.
 95.  ^  Full text of the Bishkek Protocol with signatures of representatives of Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh, and Armenia. 
      http://peacemaker.un.org/armeniaazerbaijan-bishkekprotocol94
 96.  ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  "Azerbaijan". World Factbook. CIA. 2009. Archived  from the original on 10 June 2009. Retrieved 4
      June  2009.
 97.  ^  Thomas De Waal. Black Garden: Armenia And Azerbaijan Through Peace and War. New York: New York University Press, p. 286. 
      ISBN 978-0-8147-1945-9.
 98.  ^  "Massacre by Armenians Being Reported". New York Times. 3 March 1992. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 99.  ^  Smolowe, Jill (16 March 1992). "Tragedy Massacre in Khojaly". Time. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 100. ^  A Conflict That Can Be Resolved in Time: Nagorno-Karabakh. International Herald Tribune.  29 November 2003.
 101. ^  "General Assembly adopts resolution reaffirming territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, demanding withdrawal of all
      Armenian
      forces". United Nations General Assembly. 14 March 2008. Retrieved 14 March  2008.
 102. ^  Southern Caucasus: Facing Integration Problems, Ethnic Russians Long For Better Life. EurasiaNet.org. 30 August 2003.
 103. ^  "Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic". The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1979).
 104. ^  "Azerbaijan: Rise to power". Encyclopedia of the Nations. 3 October 1993. Archived  from the original on 10 June 2011.
      Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 105. ^  "Timeline: Azerbaijan A chronology of key events:". BBC News. 31 March 2011.
 106. ^  "Azeri rights activist says 35 imprisoned special police unit members very sick". BBC Archive. 2 June 2000. Retrieved 15
      August  2009.
 107. ^  Efron, Sonni (18 March 1995). "Azerbaijan Coup Attempt Crushed Caucasus: Loyal forces storm a building and overcome
      mutinous police units, president reports.". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 15 August  2009.
 108. ^  Mulvey, Stephen (14 October 2003). "Aliyev and son keep it in the family". BBC News. Retrieved 14 October  2003.
 109. ^  "Azerbaijan's Geidar Aliev dies at 80". ChinaDaily. 16 December 2003. Archived  from the original on 17 December 2003.
      Retrieved 13 December  2003.
 110. ^  "Nov 2013 – Action against opposition". Keesing's Record of World Events. November 2013. p. 53026.
 111. ^ a  b  c  "Geographical data". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Archived  from the original
      on 25 May 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 112. ^ a  b  c  d  e  "Azerbaijan: Biodiversity". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 113. ^  "Azerbaijan's mud volcanoes on Seven Wonders of Nature shortlist". News.Az. Archived  from the original on 10 February
      2010. Retrieved 8 February  2010.
 114. ^  "Ecological problems in Azerbaijan". Enrin.grida.no. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 115. ^  "Orography of Azerbaijan". United Nations Environment Programme. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 116. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – Climate". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 117. ^ a  b  c  d  "Climate". Water Resources of the Azerbaijan Republic. Institute of Hydrometeorology, Ministry of Ecology and
      Natural Resources. Archived from the original  on 24 May 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 118. ^  "Azerbaijan: Geography". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute.
 119. ^  "The Karabakh Horse". Karabakh Foundation.
 120. ^  "Azerbaijan – Flora". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Retrieved 5 March  2010.
 121. ^  "Monitors criticize Azerbaijani elections". Al Jazeera. Archived  from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 8
      November  2010.
 122. ^  "Azerbaijan – Freedom House". FreedomHouse.org. Retrieved 4 August  2013.
 123. ^  "Combined Average Ratings: Independent Countries 2009". FreedomHouse.org. 2009. Retrieved 10 July  2012.
 124. ^  "Jailed without trial in Azerbaijan," The Washington Post. 1 March 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2015.
 125. ^  "No, this is the truth about Azerbaijan’s repression." The Washington Post. 25 September 2015. Retrieved 26 September
      2015.
 126. ^  DISGRACED AZERBAIJAN AND THE END OF ELECTION MONITORING AS WE KNOW IT
 127. ^  Jamie Doward. "Plush hotels and caviar diplomacy: how Azerbaijan's elite wooed MPs". the Guardian. Retrieved 4 July  2015
      .
 128. ^  "Europe's caviar diplomacy with Azerbaijan must end". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 129. ^  "Baku Smooths Over Its Rights Record with a Thick Layer of Caviar". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 130. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – Foreign Relations". Country Studies. Retrieved 31 May  2007.
 131. ^  "Bilateral relations". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived  from the original on 4 May 2007. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 132. ^  Lenk, Arthur (7 March 2007). "15th Anniversary of Israel-Azebraijan Diplomatic Relations"  (PDF). Ministry of Foreign
      Affairs of Israel. Retrieved 21 March  2008.
 133. ^  Kardas, Saban. "Turkey Develops Special Relationship with Azerbaijan". Eurasia Daily Monitor Volume. Retrieved 23
      December  2010.
 134. ^  Katik, Mevlut. "Azerbaijan and Turkey Coordinate Nagorno-Karabakh Negotiation Position". EurasiaNet. Retrieved 23
      December  2010.
 135. ^ a  b  c  d  "National Security Concept of the Republic of Azerbaijan"  (PDF). United Nations. 23 May 2007. Retrieved 23
      May  2007.
 136. ^  Selim Özertem, Hasan. "Independence of Kosovo and the Nagorno-Karabakh Issue". TurkishWeekly. Retrieved 24 April  2008.
 137. ^  Botelho, Greg; Tuysuz, Gul (3 April 2016). "18 Armenian, 12 Azerbaijani troops killed in fighting". CNN.
 138. ^  "The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Administrative and territorial units of Azerbaijan
      Republic". Azstat.org. Archived  from the original on 12 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 139. ^  Azerbaijan: Short History of Statehood, Embassy of Republic of Azerbaijan in Pakistan, 2005, Chapter 3.
 140. ^  Creation of National Army in 1918  (Russian).
 141. ^  Law of the Republic of Azerbaijan on Armed Forces, No. 210-XII, 9 October 1991 (Russian).
 142. ^  Azerbaijan's Army Day (26 June)  declared by Presidential Decree of 22 May 1998.
 143. ^  C. W. Blandy Azerbaijan: Is War Over Nagornyy Karabakh a Realistic Option? Advanced Research and Assessment Group.
      Caucasus Series 08/17. – Defense Academy of the United Kingdom, 2008, p.12
 144. ^  Выступление Президента Азербайджанской Республики, Верховного Главнокомандующего Гейдара Алиева на церемонии,
      посвященной
      5-й годовщине образования Национальной гвардии – Штаб Национальной гвардии Азербайджана  (in Russian). Heydar Aliyev
      Heritage Research Center. 25 December 1996.
 145. ^  Abbasov, Shahin. "Azerbaijan: Baku Can Leapfrog over Ukraine, Georgia for NATO Membership". EurasiaNet. Archived  from
      the original on 6 June 2009. Retrieved 3 June  2009.
 146. ^ a  b  Владимир Мухин (24 January 2011). "Карабахский детонатор на взводе – В Баку и Ереване все четче звучит воинственная
      риторика". Nezavisimaya Gazeta. Archived  from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 147. ^  "Russia's neighbors are preparing for war (CIS countries and Georgia has surprised the world of increasing military
      expenditures)". Gruzianews.ru. 22 February 2011. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 148. ^  "AFP: Azerbaijan warns Armenia with show of military might". Google.com. 26 June 2011. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 149. ^  Eastern approaches Ex-communist Europe (3 October 2013). "The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict: A festering sore". The Economist
      . Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 150. ^  "Baku says Armenian president still hypocrite before world community". News.Az. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 151. ^  "Azerbaijan to start manufacturing arms, military hardware in 2008". BBC Monitoring Service. Retrieved 26 January  2008.
 152. ^  "Azerbaijan to produce tanks, aviation bombs and pilotless vehicles in 2009". panarmenian. Archived  from the original on
      9 January 2009. Retrieved 24 December  2008.
 153. ^  "Uzeir Jafarov: "Azerbaijan will be unable to produce competitive military technique in the next five years"". Today.Az.
      Retrieved 26 September  2008.
 154. ^  "President Ilham Aliyev attends the openings of several defense-related facilities". Today.Az. Retrieved 4 March  2011.
 155. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – General Information". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Archived  from the original on 5 May 2007. Retrieved 
      22 May  2007.
 156. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan's Q1 inflation rate 16.6%, National Bank Chief says". Today.Az. Retrieved 29 May  2007.
 157. ^  Mehdizade, Sevinj. "Azerbaijan's New Manats: Design and Transition to a New Currency". Azerbaijan International.
 158. ^  Ismayilov, Rovshan. "Azerbaijan's Manat Makeover: Good Times Ahead?". EurasiaNet. Retrieved 7 December  2010.
 159. ^  "Top 10 reformers from Doing Business 2009". World Bank Group. Doing Business. Archived  from the original on 12
      September 2008. Retrieved 28 September  2008.
 160. ^  "World Economic Forum – The Global Competitiveness Report 2010-2011"  (PDF). Archived  (PDF)  from the original on 6
      December 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 161. ^  Bibliothek der Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/id-moe/09454.pdf
 162. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – General Information". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Archived  from the original on 28 May 2007. Retrieved 
      22 May  2007.
 163. ^  "Azerbaijan: Economy". globalEDGE. Retrieved 29 May  2007.[dead link]
 164. ^  "SOCAR plans to completed full gasification of Azerbaijan only by 2021". Azerbaijan Business Center. Retrieved 6 June 
      2010.
 165. ^ a  b  "Natural resources". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Archived from the original  on
      10 June 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 166. ^  "Azerbaijan: Status of Database". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute. Archived from the original  on 20 March 2007.
      Retrieved 28 May  2007.
 167. ^  "Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor – Azerbaijan". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 168. ^  "Azerbaijan: Transportation". Encyclopedia of the Nations. Archived  from the original on 18 April 2007. Retrieved 24 May 
       2007.
 169. ^  "Industry"  (PDF). Statistical Yearbook of Azerbaijan 2004. Archived from the original  (PDF)  on 2 February 2007.
      Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 170. ^  "Rapid Tourism Assessment for the Azerbaijan Tourism Sector Development Program – Organization for Security and
      Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)". Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 171. ^  Azərbaycan Qarabağın turizm imkanlarını təbliğ edir  (Azerbaijani)
 172. ^  Ismayilov, Rovshan. "Azerbaijan: Baku Boom Has Yet to Hit Regions". EurasiaNet. Archived  from the original on 19 August
      2007. Retrieved 12 August  2007.
 173. ^  "Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Azerbaijan: Goals". Tourism.az. 6 February 2004. Archived  from the original on 28
      November 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 174. ^  Ziyadov, Taleh. "The New Silk Roads"  (PDF). Central Asia-Caucasus Institute Silk Road Studies Program.
 175. ^  Zeyno Baran  (2005). "The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline: Implications for Turkey"  (PDF). The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
      Pipeline: Oil Window to the West. The Central Asia-Caucasus Institute, Silk Road Studies Program: 103–118. Retrieved 30
      December  2007.
 176. ^  "SCP Commissioning Commences"  (Press release). BP. 1 June 2006. Archived from the original  on 11 October 2007.
      Retrieved 4 June  2008.
 177. ^  "List of Contracting Parties to the Convention on Road Traffic"  (PDF). UN Economic Commission for Europe. Archived from 
      the original  (PDF)  on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 23 January  2010.
 178. ^  "Azerbaijan aims for hi-tech state". Euronews. Retrieved 19 December  2010.
 179. ^  "Azerbaijan is in TOP 10 of countries showing dynamic growth in Internet and mobile communications penetration". 
      bakutel.az. Retrieved 15 April  2013.
 180. ^  CIA.gov, CIA World Factbook Telephones – main lines in use, Azerbaijan 1,397,000 main lines
 181. ^  CIA.gov, CIA World Factbook Internet users, Azerbaijan Internet users: 1,485,000.
 182. ^  "Azerbaijani scientist invents earthquake-resistant building". News.Az. Retrieved 18 March  2011.
 183. ^  "International Station for the Forecasting of Earthquakes Atropatena-AZ3, Baku, Azerbaijan". Global Network for the
      Forecasting of Earthquakes.
 184. ^  Азербайджанский ученый изобрел метод оповещения о землетрясении  (in Russian). BlackSea News. Retrieved 29 March  2011.
 185. ^  "Arianespace signs deal to launch Azerbaijani satellite". News.Az. Archived  from the original on 8 November 2010.
      Retrieved 5 November  2010.
 186. ^  "Azerbaijan signs deal with Arianespace to launch satellite". Space Travel. Archived  from the original on 6 November
      2010. Retrieved 5 November  2010.
 187. ^  "Orbital Contracted to Build Azerbaijan's First Satellite". SatelliteToday. 28 November 2010. Archived  from the original
      on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 1 April  2011.
 188. ^  "Baku developing satellite to kick off national space program". Hurriyet Daily News and Economic Review. 3 December 2009.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 189. ^  "Meeting held to coordinate orbital slots for Azersat". News.Az. 16 November 2009. Archived from the original  on 11 May
      2011. Retrieved 18 March  2016.
 190. ^  "Азербайджан рассчитывает запустить спутник связи AzerSat"  (in Russian). ComNews. Retrieved 29 July  2009.
 191. ^  The State Statistical Committee of the Azerbaijan Republic, The ethnic composition of the population according to the
      2009 census.
 192. ^ a  b  "Population". Azerbaijan Gender Information Center. Archived  from the original on 10 May 2007. Retrieved 27 May 
      2007.
 193. ^  "Xaricdəki təşkilatlar"  (in Azerbaijani). State Committee on Work with Diaspora. Retrieved 25 May  2007.
 194. ^ a  b  c  d  e  "Ethnic minorities". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived  from the original on 17 April 2007. Retrieved 
      27 May  2007.
 195. ^  CIA – The World Factbook. CIA.gov  "Iran".
 196. ^  "Demoqrafik göstəricilər". Gender.az  (in Azerbaijani). Retrieved 15 April  2013.
 197. ^ a  b  Population by language, sex and urban/rural residence, UN Data. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
 198. ^  "Ethnologue report for Azerbaijan". Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Archived  from the original on 18 December 2008.
      Retrieved 3 January  2009.
 199. ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  "Endangered languages in Europe and North Asia". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 200. ^  Clifton, John M., editor. 2002 (vol 1.), 2003 (vol. 2). Studies in languages of Azerbaijan. Baku, Azerbaijan and Saint
      Petersburg, Russia: Institute of International Relations, Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan and North Eurasian Group, SIL
      International.
 201. ^  "Berkley Center for Religion Peace and World Affairs". Georgetown University. July 2012. Retrieved 23 May  2015.
 202. ^  Sharifov, Azad. "Legend of the Bibi-Heybat Mosque". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 11 July  2010.
 203. ^  "Mapping The Global Muslim Population"  (PDF). Archived  (PDF)  from the original on 19 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 204. ^  Administrative Department of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan – Presidential Library – Religion
 205. ^  http://www.pewforum.org/2009/10/07/mapping-the-global-muslim-population/
 206. ^  GALLUP – What Alabamians and Iranians Have in Common  – data accessed on 19 August 2014
 207. ^  "Global Christianity". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 1 December 2014. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 208. ^  "Catholic Church in Azerbaijan". Catholic-Hierarchy. Archived  from the original on 29 April 2007. Retrieved 27 May  2007
      .
 209. ^ a  b  Corley, Felix (9 March 2002). "Azerbaijan: 125 religious groups re-registered". Keston News Service. Retrieved 9
      April  2002.
 210. ^  "5,000 Azerbaijanis adopted Christianity"  (in Russian). Day.az. 7 July 2007. Retrieved 30 January  2012.
 211. ^  "Christian Missionaries Becoming Active in Azerbaijan"  (in Azerbaijani). Tehran Radio. 19 June 2011. Retrieved 12 August 
       2012.
 212. ^  Rothholz, Peter (20 November 2015). "Jewish Life in Azerbaijan Embodies Muslim-Majority Nation's Culture of Tolerance".
      BreakingIsraelNews. JNS.org.
 213. ^  "Baku gives land for Jewish cultural center, kosher restaurant". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 11 December 2013.
 214. ^  Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany. "How I Accidentally Became a Lobbyist for Azerbaijan". Foreign Policy.
 215. ^  Sloame, Joanna. "Azerbaijan". Jewish Virtual Library. American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise.
 216. ^  http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/192997.pdf
 217. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan: A Country Study, Education, Health, and Welfare". Country Studies.
 218. ^  "Human Development Report 2009"  (PDF). United Nations Development Program 2009. Retrieved 2009.  Check date values in: 
      |access-date=  (help)
 219. ^  "Education in Azerbaijan, The Challenges of Transition". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 220. ^  Waters, Zena. "What exactly is Novruz Bayram". Azerbaijan Today. Retrieved 22 March  2009.
 221. ^  David C. King. Azerbaijan, Marshall Cavendish, 2006, p. 94
 222. ^ a  b  Энциклопедический музыкальный словарь, 2-е изд., Москва, 1966 (Encyclopedical Music Dictionary  (1966), 2nd ed.,
      Moscow)
 223. ^  "The Azerbaijan musical instruments". Atlas.musigi-dunya.az. Archived  from the original on 26 August 2007. Retrieved 27
      May  2007.
 224. ^  During, Jean (2001). "Azerbaijan". The Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. Macmillan. ISBN978-0-333-23111-1.
 225. ^  Duncan, Ishhad. "The Baku Jazz Festival: Reviving a Tradition in Azerbaijan". EurasiaNet. Archived  from the original on
      8 May 2005. Retrieved 27 April  2005.
 226. ^  "ashik,shaman"  – European University Institute, Florence, Italy  (retrieved 10 August 2006).
 227. ^  "Azerbaijan's ashug art included into UNESCO list of Intangible Cultural Heritage". Today.Az. Archived  from the original
      on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 1 October  2009.
 228. ^  Hutcheon, David (19 September 2008). "Alim Qasimov: the living legend you've never heard of". The Times. London.
      Retrieved 19 September  2008.
 229. ^  Augstein, Frank. "Azerbaijan duo upset favorites Ireland for first-time win at 2011 Eurovision Song Contest". Daily
      Journal. Associated Press. Retrieved 14 May  2011.
 230. ^  "Azerbaijan wins the Eurovision Song Contest". BBC News. 14 May 2011. Archived  from the original on 14 May 2011.
      Retrieved 14 May  2011.
 231. ^  Lusher, Adam (15 May 2011). "Azerbaijan wins Eurovision Song Contest". The Telegraph. London. Retrieved 15 May  2011.
 232. ^  Azerbaijan. Cultural life. Encyclopædia Britannica.
 233. ^ a  b  Beale, Thomas William; Keene Henry George (1894). An Oriental Biographical Dictionary. W.H.Allen. p. 311.
 234. ^ a  b  A.Caferoglu, "Adhari(azeri)",in Encyclopedia of Islam, (new edition), Vol. 1, (Leiden, 1986)
 235. ^  Tyrrell, Maliheh S. (2001). Aesopian Literary Dimensions of Azerbaijani Literature of the Soviet Period, 1920–1990.
      Lexington Books. p. 12. ISBN978-0-7391-0169-8.
 236. ^  Průšek, Jaroslav (1974). Dictionary of Oriental Literatures. Basic Books. p. 138.
 237. ^  Baldick, Julian (2000). Mystical Islam: An Introduction to Sufism. I.B. Tauris. p. 103. ISBN978-1-86064-631-7.
 238. ^ a  b  Burrill, Kathleen R.F. (1972). The Quatrains of Nesimi Fourteenth-Century Turkic Hurufi. Walter de Gruyter GmbH &
      Co. KG. ISBN978-90-279-2328-8.
 239. ^  Lambton, Ann K. S.; Holt, Peter Malcolm; Lewis, Bernard (1970). The Cambridge History of Islam. Cambridge University
      Press. p. 689. ISBN978-0-521-29138-5.
 240. ^ a  b  c  "Seyid Imadeddin Nesimi". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Archived  from the original on 18 January 2008.
      Retrieved 1 September  2008.
 241. ^  Babinger, Franz (2008). "Nesīmī, Seyyid ʿImād al-Dīn". Encyclopaedia of Islam. Brill Online. Retrieved 1 September  2008.
 242. ^  Michael E. Meeker, "The Dede Korkut Ethic", International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 24, No. 3 (Aug. 1992),
      395–417. excerpt: The Book of Dede Korkut is an early record of oral Turkic folktales in Anatolia, and as such, one of the
      mythic charters of Turkish nationalist ideology. The oldest versions of the Book of Dede Korkut consist of two manuscripts
      copied in the 16th century. The twelve stories that are recorded in these manuscripts are believed to be derived from a
      cycle of stories and songs circulating among Turkic peoples living in northeastern Anatolia and northwestern Azerbaijan.
      According to Lewis (1974), an older substratum of these oral traditions dates to conflicts between the ancient Oghuz and
      their Turkish rivals in Central Asia (the Pecheneks and the Kipchaks), but this substratum has been clothed in references to
      the 14th-century campaigns of the Akkoyunlu Confederation of Turkic tribes against the Georgians, the Abkhaz, and the Greeks
      in Trebizond. Such stories and songs would have emerged no earlier than the beginning of the 13th century, and the written
      versions that have reached us would have been composed no later than the beginning of the 15th century. By this time, the
      Turkic peoples in question had been in touch with Islamic civilization for several centuries, had come to call themselves
      "Turcoman" rather than "Oghuz," had close associations with sedentary and urbanized societies, and were participating in
      Islamized regimes that included nomads, farmers, and townsmen. Some had abandoned their nomadic way of life altogether.
 243. ^  Cemal Kafadar(1995), "in Between Two Worlds: Construction of the Ottoman states", University of California Press, 1995.
      Excerpt: "It was not earlier than the fifteenth century. Based on the fact that the author is buttering up both the
      Akkoyunlu and Ottoman rulers, it has been suggested that the composition belongs to someone living in the undefined border
      region lands between the two states during the reign of Uzun Hassan (1466–78). G. Lewis on the hand dates the composition
      "fairly early in the 15th century at least."
 244. ^ a  b  İlker Evrım Bınbaş,Encyclopædia Iranica, "Oguz Khan Narratives" Encyclopædia Iranica | Articles. Retrieved October
      2010. "The Ketāb-e Dede Qorqut, which is a collection of twelve stories reflecting the oral traditions of the Turkmens in
      the 15th-century eastern Anatolia, is also called Oḡuz-nāma"
 245. ^  Minorsky, Vladimir (1942). "The Poetry of Shah Ismail". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies,
      University of London. 10  (4): 1053. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00090182.
 246. ^  Samuel, Geoffrey; Gregor, Hamish; Stutchbury, Elisabeth (1994). Tantra and Popular Religion in Tibet. International
      Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan. p. 60. ISBN978-81-85689-68-5.
 247. ^  "The traditional art of Azerbaijani carpet weaving in the Republic of Azerbaijan". Unesco.org. Archived  from the
      original on 5 December 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 248. ^  "Azerbaijani carpet entered UNESCO List of Intangible Cultural Heritage". Azerbaijan Press Agency. Retrieved 4 January 
      2011.
 249. ^  "Ancient Heritage of the BTC – SCP Pipeline Corridor". Smithsonian. Retrieved 21 April  2014.
 250. ^  "Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura". UNESCO.
 251. ^  Akhmedov, IA. Азербайджанская кухня  (in Russian). Издательство "Ишыг".
 252. ^  "Chaihana: culture in action". Aze.info. Retrieved 14 December  2012.
 253. ^  The Azerbaijani Turks: power and identity under Russian rule. Audrey L. Altstadt. Hoover Institution Press. ISBN
      9780817991821. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 254. ^  Khanlou, Pirouz. "Baku's Architecture A Fusion of East and West". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 255. ^  "Azerbaijan Properties inscribed on the World Heritage List". UNESCO.
 256. ^  "World Heritage Sites in Azerbaijan". World Heritage Site.
 257. ^  "Over 70 underground stations to be built in Baku". News.Az. Retrieved 18 February  2011.
 258. ^  1 February 2012 Jon Walton (1 February 2012). "$100 Billion Khazar Islands Taking Shape". Construction Digital. Retrieved
       25 March  2013.
 259. ^  Glass, Nick. "Flame Towers light up Baku's historic skyline". CNN. Retrieved 14 April  2013.
 260. ^  Наскальные рисунки Гямигая
 261. ^  "Ornaments Coming from Gobustan". Diva International.
 262. ^  "Gobustan Rock Art". www.worldheritagesite.org. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 263. ^  "Azerbaijani Artists". www.arthistoryarchive.com. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 264. ^  "Steps of Time & Art is not only ugly". universes-in-universe.org. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 265. ^ a  b  "Cinema in Azerbaijan: Pre-Soviet Era". "Azerbaijan International". Autumn 1997. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 266. ^  Celebrating 100 Years in Film, not 80  by Aydin Kazimzade. Azerbaijan International, Autumn 1997
 267. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijani cinema in 1920–1935: Silent films". OCAZ.eu.
 268. ^  Kazimova, Arifa: "Media in Azerbaijan: The Ruling Family Dominates TV, the Opposition Has Some Papers" in the Caucasus
      Analytical Digest No. 25
 269. ^ a  b  Freedom House, Azerbaijan  2015 Press Freedom report
 270. ^  Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, The Protection of media freedom in Europe.Background report prepared by
      Mr William Horsley, special representative for media freedom of the Association of European Journalists
 271. ^  "Freedom of the Press 2013"  (PDF). Freedom House.
 272. ^  "Threat to retransmission of BBC, Voice of America and Radio Liberty/Radio Free Europe". Reporters Without Borders.
 273. ^  Ognianova, Nina. "Baku 2015: Press freedom, Azerbaijan, and the European Games". Committee to Protect Journalists.
 274. ^  Nozadze, Natalia. "Azerbaijan closes its doors". News. Amnesty International. Retrieved 15 June  2016.
 275. ^  Amnesty, International. "Annual report on Azerbaijan". Amnesty International.
 276. ^  "Sport". Expatwoman.com. Retrieved 12 April  2014.
 277. ^  "Azərbaycanda nə qədər futbolçu var?". news.milli.az  (in Azerbaijani). Retrieved 27 January  2014.
 278. ^  "Football in Azerbaijan". www.fifa.com. FIFA. Retrieved 27 January  2014.
 279. ^  "Нефтчи" стал первым азербайджанским футбольным клубом, вышедшим в групповой этап еврокубков – ФОТО. 1news.az  (in
      Russian). Retrieved 30 August  2012.
 280. ^  ЦСКА вылетел из еврокубков  (in Russian). UEFA. Retrieved 30 August  2012.
 281. ^  "Araz clinch third place on penalties". UEFA. 25 April 2010. Retrieved 25 April  2010.[dead link]
 282. ^  "Azerbaijan: Official Atlético sponsor". Club Atlético de Madrid. Retrieved 25 April  2015.
 283. ^  "Chess with Luke McShane". Express.co.uk. Retrieved 12 April  2014.
 284. ^  "Azerbaijan's chess team became European champion". Today.Az. 31 October 2009. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 285. ^  "Azerbaijan, Russia take gold at the European Team Chess Championship". Chessdom. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 286. ^  "World Chess Champion: Zeynab Mammadyarova". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 287. ^  "Carlsen beats Nakamura for perfect 2/2 start in the Gashimov Memorial". www.theweekinchess.com. Retrieved 24 April  2014
      .
 288. ^  История нард  (in Russian). 1-Kalyan. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 289. ^  Нарды – игра, требующая сноровки и удачи  (Russian)
 290. ^  История Нард  (in Russian). Nards.
 291. ^  "More than just Mammadova: Azerbaijan's ladies cause World Championship upset". www.fivb.org  (Press release). Retrieved 
      8 May  2014.
 292. ^  "Vakıfbank women achieve historic success, winning intercontinental volleyball trophy". www.hurriyetdailynews.com.
      Retrieved 8 May  2014.
 293. ^  Sylt, Christian. "F1 Will Race in Azerbaijan in 2016 Says Ecclestone". www.forbes.com. Retrieved 25 July  2014.
 294. ^  http://namnak.com/%D8%A7%DB%8C%D8%B1%D8%A7%D9%86%DB%8C-%D9%87%D8%A7%DB%8C-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D9%BE%DB%8C%DA%A9.p34800
 295. ^  "Azerbaijan is a country known for its love of sport and sportsmanship.". www.baku2015.com. Retrieved 27 January  2014.[
      permanent dead link]
 296. ^  "Baku 2015 heralds new era in European sports movement". The Washington Times. Retrieved 27 January  2014.

FURTHER READING
 * Olukbasi, Suha. Azerbaijan: A Political History. I.B. Tauris (2011). Focus on post-Soviet era.
 * de Waal, Thomas. Black Garden. NYU (2003). ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
 * Goltz, Thomas. Azerbaijan Diary : A Rogue Reporter's Adventures in an Oil-Rich, War-Torn, Post-Soviet Republic. M E Sharpe
   (1998). ISBN 0-7656-0244-X

EXTERNAL LINKS
Listen to this article  (info/dl)


This audio file was created from a revision of the "Azerbaijan" article dated 2008-06-23, and does not reflect subsequent edits to
the article. (Audio help)More spoken articlesThe Wikibook Wikijunior:Countries A-Z  has a page on the topic of: AzerbaijanFind
more about
Azerbaijan
at Wikipedia's sister projectsDefinitions  from WiktionaryMedia  from CommonsNews  from WikinewsQuotations  from WikiquoteTexts 
from WikisourceTextbooks  from WikibooksTravel guide  from WikivoyageLearning resources  from WikiversityGeneral information * 
   Azerbaijan International
 * 
   Heydar Aliyev Foundation
 * 
   Azerbaijan  at DMOZ
 * 
   "Azerbaijan". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
 * 
   Azerbaijan  at University of Colorado at Boulder
 * 
   Country profile  from BBC
 * 
   Key
   Development Forecasts for Azerbaijan  from International Futures
 *   Geographic data related to Azerbaijan  at OpenStreetMap
 *   Media related to Azerbaijan  at Wikimedia Commons

Major government resources * President of Azerbaijan website
 * Azerbaijan State Statistical Committee
 * United Nations Office in Azerbaijan

Major news media * Azerbaijan Today
 * Azerbaijan Press Agency
 * Trend News Agency
 * News.Az

Tourism * Azerbaijan Tourism Portal
 *   Wikimedia Atlas of Azerbaijan

Coordinates: 40°18′N 47°42′E﻿ /40.3°N 47.7°E﻿ / 40.3; 47.7

 * v
 * t
 * e

AzerbaijanarticlesHistoryEarly * Kura–Araxes culture
 * Khojaly–Gadabay culture
 * Shulaveri-Shomu culture
 * Mughan culture
 * Jar-Burial Culture
 * Leyla-Tepe culture
 * Mannaeans
 * Medes
 * Achaemenid Empire
 * Atropatene
 * Caucasian Albania
 * Parthian Empire
 * Arran (Caucasus)
 * Sasanian Empire
 * Shirvan

Middle Ages * Sajid dynasty
 * Sallarid dynasty
 * Rawwadids
 * Shaddadids
 * Shirvanshahs
 * Kingdom of Syunik  (Siunia dynasty)
 * Eldiguzids
 * Ilkhanate
 * Principality of Khachen  (House of Dop, House of Hasan-Jalalyan)
 * Kara Koyunlu
 * Ag Qoyunlu
 * Safavid dynasty
 * Afsharid dynasty
 * Zand dynasty
 * Qajar dynasty
 * Russo-Persian War (1804–13)
 * Treaty of Gulistan
 * Russo-Persian War (1826–28)
 * Treaty of Turkmenchay

Modern * Armenian–Tatar massacres
 * March Days
 * Armenian–Azerbaijani War
 * Azerbaijan Democratic Republic
 * Soviet Azerbaijan
 * Nagorno-Karabakh War
 * Black January
 * Independent Azerbaijan

By topic * History of the name Azerbaijan
 * The Land of Fire

Geography * Bodies of water
 * Caspian Sea
 * Climate
 * Earthquakes
 * Environment * issues
   
   
 * Extreme points
 * Fauna
 * Flora
 * Geology
 * Mountains
 * National parks
 * Orography
 * Protected areas
 * State reserves
 * Wildlife
 * more...

Subdivisions * Administrative divisions
 * Cities
 * World Heritage Sites
 * more...

PoliticsGovernment * Cabinet
 * Constitution
 * Elections
 * Foreign relations * European Union
   
   
 * Human rights * LGBT
   
   
 * Law enforcement
 * Ministry of National Security
 * National Assembly
 * Political parties
 * Politics
 * President
 * Prime Minister

Military * History
 * Air and Air Defence Force
 * Caspian Guard
 * Internal Troops
 * Land Forces
 * National Guard
 * Navy
 * Peacekeeping forces
 * State Border Service
 * Gabala Radar Station
 * Ministry of Defense
 * Ministry of Defence Industry
 * more...

Economy * Agriculture
 * Central Bank
 * Companies
 * Energy
 * Manat (currency)
 * Mineral industry
 * Petroleum industry
 * Telecommunications
 * Tourism
 * Transport
 * more...

Culture * Architecture
 * Art
 * Cinema
 * Cuisine
 * Dances
 * Dress
 * Folklore
 * Language
 * Literature
 * Media
 * Music * Ashiq
    * Meykhana
    * Mugham
   
   
 * Novruz (New Year)
 * Public holidays
 * Rugs
 * Sport
 * Theatre
 * more...

Demographics * Education
 * Ethnic minorities
 * Health
 * Languages
 * LGBT history
 * People * list
   
   
 * more...

Religion * Freedom of religion
 * Bahá'í
 * Christianity
 * Hinduism
 * Islam
 * Judaism
 * Zoroastrianism
 * more...

Symbols * Flag
 * National anthem
 * National emblem

 * Outline
 * Index

 * Book
 * Category
 * Portal

 * v
 * t
 * e

Countries and dependencies  of AsiaSovereign states * Afghanistan
 * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Bahrain
 * Bangladesh
 * Bhutan
 * Brunei
 * Cambodia
 * China
 * Cyprus
 * Egypt
 * Georgia
 * India
 * Indonesia
 * Iran
 * Iraq
 * Israel
 * Japan
 * Jordan
 * Kazakhstan
 * North Korea
 * South Korea
 * Kuwait
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Laos
 * Lebanon
 * Malaysia
 * Maldives
 * Mongolia
 * Myanmar
 * Nepal
 * Oman
 * Pakistan
 * Philippines
 * Qatar
 * Russia
 * Saudi Arabia
 * Singapore
 * Sri Lanka
 * Syria
 * Tajikistan
 * Thailand
 * East Timor (Timor-Leste)
 * Turkey
 * Turkmenistan
 * United Arab Emirates
 * Uzbekistan
 * Vietnam
 * Yemen

States with limited recognition * Abkhazia
 * Nagorno-Karabakh
 * Northern Cyprus
 * Palestine
 * South Ossetia
 * Taiwan

Dependencies  and  special
administrative regionsAustralia * Christmas Island
 * Cocos (Keeling) Islands

China * Hong Kong
 * Macau

United Kingdom * Akrotiri and Dhekelia
 * British Indian Ocean Territory

 * v
 * t
 * e

Sovereign states and dependencies  of EuropeSovereign states * Albania
 * Andorra
 * Armenia1
 * Austria
 * Azerbaijan1
 * Belarus
 * Belgium
 * Bosnia and Herzegovina
 * Bulgaria
 * Croatia
 * Cyprus1
 * Czech Republic
 * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * France
 * Georgia1
 * Germany
 * Greece1
 * Hungary
 * Iceland
 * Ireland
 * Italy
 * Kazakhstan1
 * Latvia
 * Liechtenstein
 * Lithuania
 * Luxembourg
 * Macedonia
 * Malta
 * Moldova
 * Monaco
 * Montenegro
 * Netherlands
 * Norway
 * Poland
 * Portugal
 * Romania
 * Russia1
 * San Marino
 * Serbia
 * Slovakia
 * Slovenia
 * Spain2
 * Sweden
 * Switzerland
 * Turkey1
 * Ukraine
 * United Kingdom
 * Vatican City

States with limited
recognition * Abkhazia1
 * Kosovo
 * Nagorno-Karabakh1
 * Northern Cyprus1
 * South Ossetia1
 * Transnistria

Dependencies  and
other territoriesDenmark * Faroe Islands * constituent country
   
   

Finland * Åland Islands * autonomous region
   
   

Norway * Jan Mayen
 * Svalbard * unincorporated areas
   
   

United Kingdom * Akrotiri and Dhekelia1 * sovereign base areas
   
   
 * Gibraltar * overseas territory
   
   
 * Guernsey
 * Isle of Man
 * Jersey * crown dependencies
   
   

1  Partially  in Asia, or entirely in Asia with cultural links to Europe. 2  Partially  in Africa * v
 * t
 * e

Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS) * Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia
 * Eurasian Economic Union
 * Union State

MembershipMembers * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Belarus
 * Kazakhstan
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Moldova
 * Russia
 * Tajikistan
 * Uzbekistan

Associate members * Turkmenistan
 * Ukraine

Former members * Georgia  (1993–2009)

History * Russian Empire
 * Soviet Union
 * Union of Sovereign States
 * Belavezha Accords  (Near abroad)
 * Alma-Ata Protocol

Sports * Unified Team at the Olympics
 * Unified Team at the Paralympics
 * CIS national bandy team
 * CIS national football team
 * CIS national ice hockey team
 * CIS national rugby team
 * CIS Cup (football)

Military * Collective Security Treaty Organization
 * Collective Rapid Reaction Force
 * Joint CIS Air Defense System

Economics * Economic Court
 * CISFTA
 * Eurasian Economic Community
 * Eurasian Patent Convention
 * Eurasian Patent Organization
 * EU Technical Aid

Organization * Interstate Aviation Committee

 *   Category

Authority control * WorldCat Identities
 * VIAF: 260253802
 * LCCN: n92000010
 * GND: 4068887-2
 * NDL: 00577523"Russian Federation" redirects here. For other uses of "Russia", see Russia (disambiguation).Coordinates: 60°N 90°E﻿ /60°N 90°E﻿ / 60; 90

Russian Federation
Российская Федерация
Rossijskaja FederacijaFlagCoat of armsAnthem:
"Государственный гимн Российской Федерации"
"Gosudarstvenný gimn Rossijskoj Federací"(transliteration)
"State Anthem of the Russian Federation"
Russia (dark green)
Crimea  (disputed, Russian-administered) (light green)aCapital
and largest cityMoscow
55°45′N 37°37′E﻿ /55.750°N 37.617°E﻿ / 55.750; 37.617Official languagesRussianEthnic groups  (2010[1]) * 81.0% Russian
 * 3.7% Tatar
 * 1.4% Ukrainian
 * 1.1% Bashkir
 * 1.0% Chuvash
 * 0.8% Chechen
 * 11.0% others /
   unspecified

DemonymRussianGovernmentFederal  semi-presidential  constitutional republic[2] •PresidentVladimir Putin •Prime MinisterDmitry
Medvedev •Chairman of the Federation CouncilValentina Matviyenko •Chairman of the State DumaVyacheslav VolodinLegislatureFederal
Assembly •Upper houseFederation Council •Lower houseState DumaFormation •Arrival of Rurik[3]862 •Kievan Rus'882 •Grand Duchy of
Moscow1283 •Tsardom of RussiaJanuary 16, 1547 •Russian EmpireOctober 22, 1721 •Russian SFSRNovember 6, 1917 •Soviet UnionDecember
30, 1922 •Russian FederationDecember 25, 1991 •Current ConstitutionDecember 12, 1993Area •Total17,075,200 (Crimea not included)[4]
 km2  (1st)
6,592,800 (Crimea not included) sq mi •Water (%)13[5](including swamps)Population •2016 estimate143,434,154[6]  (Crimea not
included) [7]  (9th) •Density8.4/km2  (217th)
21.5/sq miGDP (PPP)2016 estimate •Total$3.685 trillion (6th) •Per capita$25,185 (53rd)GDP (nominal)2016 estimate •Total$1.133
trillion (14th) •Per capita$7,742[8]  (72nd)Gini (2013)40.1[9]
medium·  83rdHDI  (2014) 0.798[10]
high·  50thCurrencyRussian ruble  (₽) (RUB)Time zone(UTC+2 to +12)Date formatdd.mm.yyyyDrives on therightCalling code+7ISO 3166
codeRUInternet TLD * .ru
 * .su
 * .рф

a.The Crimean Peninsula is recognized  as territory of Ukraine  by a majority of UN member nations, but is de facto administered 
by Russia.[11]Russia  (i/ˈrʌʃə/; Russian: Росси́я, tr.  Rossija; IPA:[rɐˈsʲijə]; from the Greek: Ρωσία  — Rus'), also officially known as the 
Russian Federation[12]  (Russian: Росси́йская Федера́ция, tr.  Rossijskaja Federacija; IPA:[rɐˈsʲijskəjə fʲɪdʲɪˈratsɨjə]), is a 
transcontinental country  in Eurasia.[13]  At 17,075,200 square kilometres (6,592,800 sq mi),[14]  Russia is the largest country
in the world, covering more than one eighth of Earth's inhabited land area,[15][16][17]  and the ninth most populous, with over
146.6 million people at the end of March 2016.[18][7]  The European western part of the country is much more populated and 
urbanised  than the East, about 77% of the population live in European Russia. Russia's capital Moscow  is one of the largest
cities in the world, other major urban centers  include Saint Petersburg, Novosibirsk, Yekaterinburg, Nizhny Novgorod  and Samara.

Extending across the entirety of northern Asia  and much of Eastern Europe, Russia spans eleven time zones  and incorporates a
wide range of environments  and landforms. From northwest to southeast, Russia shares land borders  with Norway, Finland, Estonia,
 Latvia, Lithuania  and Poland  (both with Kaliningrad Oblast), Belarus, Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, China, Mongolia
, and North Korea. It shares maritime borders  with Japan  by the Sea of Okhotsk  and the U.S.  state of Alaska  across the 
Bering
Strait.

The nation's history began with that of the East Slavs, who emerged as a recognizable group in Europe  between the 3rd and 8th
centuries AD.[19]  Founded and ruled by a Varangian  warrior elite and their descendants, the medieval  state of Rus  arose in the
9th century. In 988 it adopted Orthodox Christianity  from the Byzantine Empire,[20]  beginning the synthesis of Byzantine and
Slavic cultures that defined Russian culture  for the next millennium.[20]  Rus' ultimately disintegrated into a number of smaller
states; most of the Rus' lands were overrun by the Mongol invasion  and became tributaries of the nomadic Golden Horde  in the
13th century.[21]  The Grand Duchy of Moscow  gradually reunified the surrounding Russian principalities, achieved independence
from the Golden Horde, and came to dominate the cultural and political legacy of Kievan Rus'. By the 18th century, the nation had
greatly expanded through conquest, annexation, and exploration  to become the Russian Empire, which was the third largest empire 
in history, stretching from Poland  on the west to Alaska  on the east.[22][23]

Following the Russian Revolution, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic  became the largest and leading constituent of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the world's first constitutionally socialist state.[24]  The Soviet Union played a
decisive role  in the Allied  victory in World War II,[25][26]  and emerged as a recognized superpower  and rival to the United
States  during the Cold War. The Soviet era saw some of the most significant technological achievements  of the 20th century,
including the world's first human-made satellite  and the launching of the first humans in space. By the end of 1990, the Soviet
Union  had the world's second largest economy, largest standing military in the world and the largest stockpile of weapons of mass
destruction.[27][28][29]  Following the partition of the Soviet Union  in 1991, fourteen independent republics emerged from the
USSR; as the largest, most populous, and most economically developed republic, the Russian SFSR  reconstituted itself as the
Russian Federation and is recognized as the continuing legal personality and sole successor state  of the Soviet Union.[30]  It is
governed as a federal  semi-presidential  republic.

The Russian economy  ranks as the twelfth largest  by nominal GDP  and sixth largest  by purchasing power parity  in 2015.[31] 
Russia's extensive mineral and energy resources are the largest such reserves in the world,[32]  making it one of the leading 
producers of oil  and natural gas  globally.[33][34]  The country is one of the five recognized  nuclear weapons states  and
possesses the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction.[35]  Russia is a great power  and a permanent member  of the 
United Nations Security Council, as well as a member of the G20, the Council of Europe, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC), the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation  (SCO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe  (OSCE), and the 
World Trade Organization  (WTO), as well as being the leading member of the Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS), the 
Collective Security Treaty Organization  (CSTO) and one of the five members of the Eurasian Economic Union  (EEU), along with 
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan.



ETYMOLOGY
Main articles: Rus' people  and Rus' (name)The name Russia  is derived from Rus, a medieval state populated mostly by the East Slavs. However, this proper name became more
prominent in the later history, and the country typically was called by its inhabitants "Русская Земля" (russkaja zemlja), which
can be translated as "Russian Land" or "Land of Rus'". In order to distinguish this state from other states derived from it, it is
denoted as Kievan Rus'  by modern historiography. The name Rus  itself comes from Rus people, a group of Varangians  (possibly 
Swedish  Vikings)[36][37]  who founded the state of Rus  (Русь).

An old Latin version of the name Rus' was Ruthenia, mostly applied to the western and southern regions of Rus' that were adjacent
to Catholic Europe. The current name of the country, Россия (Rossija), comes from the Byzantine Greek  designation of the Kievan
Rus', Ρωσσία Rossía—spelt Ρωσία (Rosía  pronounced[roˈsia]) in Modern Greek.[38]

The standard way to refer to citizens of Russia is "Russians".[39]

HISTORY
Main article: History of RussiaPREHISTORY
Main article: Prehistory of RussiaFurther information: Scythia, Early Slavs, East Slavs, Huns, Turkic expansion, and Prehistory
of
SiberiaFurther information: Proto-Indo-European  and Proto-UralicNomadic pastoralism  developed in the Pontic-Caspian steppe  beginning in the Chalcolithic.[40]

In classical antiquity, the Pontic Steppe  was known as Scythia. Beginning in the 8th century BC, Ancient Greek  traders brought
their civilization to the trade emporiums in Tanais  and Phanagoria. The Romans  settled on the western part of the Caspian Sea,
where their empire  stretched towards the east.[dubious  – discuss][41]  In the 3rd to 4th centuries AD a semi-legendary Gothic
kingdom of Oium  existed in Southern Russia until it was overrun by Huns. Between the 3rd and 6th centuries AD, the Bosporan
Kingdom, a Hellenistic polity which succeeded the Greek colonies,[42]  was also overwhelmed by nomadic invasions led by warlike
tribes, such as the Huns and Eurasian Avars.[43]  A Turkic people, the Khazars, ruled the lower Volga  basin steppes between the 
Caspian  and Black Seas  until the 10th century.[44]

The ancestors of modern Russians  are the Slavic tribes, whose original home is thought by some scholars to have been the wooded
areas of the Pinsk Marshes.[45]  The East Slavs gradually settled Western Russia in two waves: one moving from Kiev  toward
present-day Suzdal  and Murom  and another from Polotsk  toward Novgorod  and Rostov. From the 7th century onwards, the East Slavs
constituted the bulk of the population in Western Russia[46]  and assimilated the native Finno-Ugric peoples, including the Merya,
the Muromians, and the Meshchera.

KIEVAN RUS'
Main articles: Rus' Khaganate, Kievan Rus', and List of early East Slavic states
Kievan Rus' in the 11th centuryThe establishment of the first East Slavic states in the 9th century coincided with the arrival of Varangians, the traders,
warriors and settlers from the Baltic Sea region. Primarily they were Vikings  of Scandinavian  origin, who ventured along the
waterways extending from the eastern Baltic to the Black  and Caspian  Seas.[47]  According to the Primary Chronicle, a Varangian
from Rus' people, named Rurik, was elected ruler of Novgorod  in 862. In 882 his successor Oleg  ventured south and conquered Kiev
,[48]  which had been previously paying tribute to the Khazars, founding Kievan Rus'. Oleg, Rurik's son Igor  and Igor's son 
Sviatoslav  subsequently subdued all local East Slavic  tribes to Kievan rule, destroyed the Khazar khaganate  and launched
several military expeditions to Byzantium  and Persia.

In the 10th to 11th centuries Kievan Rus' became one of the largest and most prosperous states in Europe.[49]  The reigns of 
Vladimir the Great  (980–1015) and his son Yaroslav the Wise  (1019–1054) constitute the Golden Age  of Kiev, which saw the
acceptance of  Orthodox Christianity  from Byzantium  and the creation of the first East Slavic written legal code, the Russkaya
Pravda.

In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Kipchaks  and the Pechenegs, caused a
massive migration of Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north, particularly to the area known as 
Zalesye.[50]

The Baptism of Kievans, by Klavdy LebedevThe age of feudalism  and decentralization was marked by constant in-fighting between members of the Rurik Dynasty  that ruled
Kievan Rus' collectively. Kiev's dominance waned, to the benefit of Vladimir-Suzdal  in the north-east, Novgorod Republic  in the
north-west and Galicia-Volhynia  in the south-west.

Ultimately Kievan Rus' disintegrated, with the final blow being the Mongol invasion  of 1237–40[51]  that resulted in the
destruction of Kiev[52]  and the death of about half the population of Rus'.[53]  The invading Mongol elite, together with their
conquered Turkic subjects (Cumans, Kipchaks, Bulgars), became known as Tatars, forming the state of the Golden Horde, which
pillaged the Russian principalities; the Mongols ruled the Cuman-Kipchak confederation  and Volga Bulgaria  (modern-day southern
and central expanses of Russia) for over two centuries.[54]

Galicia-Volhynia was eventually assimilated by the Kingdom of Poland, while the Mongol-dominated Vladimir-Suzdal and Novgorod
Republic, two regions on the periphery of Kiev, established the basis for the modern Russian nation.[20]  The Novgorod together
with Pskov  retained some degree of autonomy during the time of the Mongol yoke  and were largely spared the atrocities that
affected the rest of the country. Led by Prince Alexander Nevsky, Novgorodians repelled the invading Swedes in the Battle of the
Neva  in 1240, as well as the Germanic crusaders  in the Battle of the Ice  in 1242, breaking their attempts to colonize the
Northern Rus'.

GRAND DUCHY OF MOSCOW
Main article: Grand Duchy of MoscowSergius of Radonezh  blessing Dmitry Donskoy  in Trinity Sergius Lavra, before the Battle of
Kulikovo, depicted in a painting by Ernst LissnerThe most powerful state to eventually arise after the destruction of Kievan Rus'
was the Grand Duchy of Moscow  ("Muscovy" in the Western chronicles), initially a part of Vladimir-Suzdal. While still under the
domain of the Mongol-Tatars  and with their connivance, Moscow began to assert its influence in the Central Rus' in the early 14th
century, gradually becoming the leading force in the process of the Rus' lands' reunification and expansion of Russia.[citation
needed]  Moscow's last rival, the Novgorod Republic, prospered as the chief fur trade  center and the easternmost port of the 
Hanseatic League.

Times remained difficult, with frequent Mongol-Tatar raids. Agriculture  suffered from the beginning of the Little Ice Age. As in
the rest of Europe, plague  was a frequent occurrence between 1350 and 1490.[55]  However, because of the lower population density
and better hygiene—widespread practicing of banya, a wet steam bath—the death rate from plague was not as severe as in Western
Europe,[56]  and population numbers recovered by 1500.[55]

Led by Prince Dmitry Donskoy  of Moscow and helped by the Russian Orthodox Church, the united army of Russian principalities
inflicted a milestone defeat on the Mongol-Tatars in the Battle of Kulikovo  in 1380. Moscow gradually absorbed the surrounding
principalities, including formerly strong rivals such as Tver  and Novgorod.

Ivan III  ("the Great") finally threw off the control of the Golden Horde  and consolidated the whole of Central and Northern Rus'
under Moscow's dominion. He was also the first to take the title "Grand Duke of all the Russias".[57]  After the fall of
Constantinople  in 1453, Moscow claimed succession to the legacy  of the Eastern Roman Empire. Ivan III married Sophia
Palaiologina, the niece of the last Byzantine emperor  Constantine XI, and made the Byzantine double-headed eagle  his own, and
eventually Russia's, coat-of-arms.

TSARDOM OF RUSSIA
Main article: Tsardom of Russia
Tsar Ivan the Terrible  by Victor VasnetsovIn development of the Third Rome  ideas, the Grand Duke Ivan IV  (the "Terrible")[58]  was officially crowned the first Tsar  ("
Caesar") of Russia in 1547. The Tsar  promulgated  a new code of laws (Sudebnik of 1550), established the first Russian feudal
representative body (Zemsky Sobor) and introduced local self-management into the rural regions.[59][60]

During his long reign, Ivan the Terrible nearly doubled the already large Russian territory by annexing the three Tatar khanates
(parts of the disintegrated Golden Horde): Kazan  and Astrakhan  along the Volga River, and the Siberian Khanate  in southwestern
Siberia. Thus, by the end of the 16th century Russia was transformed into a multiethnic, multidenominational  and 
transcontinental
state.

However, the Tsardom was weakened by the long and unsuccessful Livonian War  against the coalition of Poland, Lithuania, and
Sweden for access to the Baltic coast and sea trade.[61]  At the same time, the Tatars of the Crimean Khanate, the only remaining
successor to the Golden Horde, continued to raid Southern Russia.[62]  In an effort to restore the Volga khanates, Crimeans and
their Ottoman  allies invaded central Russia  and were even able to burn down parts of Moscow  in 1571.[63]  But in the next year
the large invading army was thoroughly defeated by Russians in the Battle of Molodi, forever eliminating the threat of an
Ottoman–Crimean expansion into Russia. The slave raids of Crimeans, however, did not cease until the late 17th century though the
construction of new fortification lines across Southern Russia, such as the Great Abatis Line, constantly narrowed the area
accessible to incursions.[64]

Monument to Minin and Pozharsky  in MoscowThe death of Ivan's sons marked the end of the ancient Rurik Dynasty  in 1598, and in combination with the famine of 1601–03[65] 
led to civil war, the rule of pretenders, and foreign intervention during the Time of Troubles  in the early 17th century.[66] 
The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth  occupied parts of Russia, including Moscow. In 1612, the Poles were forced to retreat by the
Russian volunteer corps, led by two national heroes, merchant Kuzma Minin  and Prince Dmitry Pozharsky. The Romanov Dynasty 
acceded to the throne in 1613 by the decision of Zemsky Sobor, and the country started its gradual recovery from the crisis.

Russia continued its territorial growth through the 17th century, which was the age of Cossacks. Cossacks were warriors organized
into military communities, resembling pirates  and pioneers of the New World. In 1648, the peasants of Ukraine joined the 
Zaporozhian Cossacks  in rebellion against Poland-Lithuania during the Khmelnytsky Uprising  in reaction to the social and
religious oppression they had been suffering under Polish rule. In 1654, the Ukrainian leader, Bohdan Khmelnytsky, offered to
place Ukraine under the protection of the Russian Tsar, Aleksey I. Aleksey's acceptance of this offer led to another Russo-Polish
War. Finally, Ukraine was split along the Dnieper River, leaving the western part, right-bank Ukraine, under Polish rule and the
eastern part (Left-bank Ukraine  and Kiev) under Russian rule. Later, in 1670–71, the Don Cossacks  led by Stenka Razin  initiated
a major uprising in the Volga Region, but the Tsar's troops were successful in defeating the rebels.

In the east, the rapid Russian exploration and colonisation of the huge territories of Siberia was led mostly by Cossacks hunting
for valuable furs and ivory. Russian explorers  pushed eastward primarily along the Siberian River Routes, and by the mid-17th
century there were Russian settlements in Eastern Siberia, on the Chukchi Peninsula, along the Amur River, and on the Pacific
coast. In 1648, the Bering Strait  between Asia and North America was passed for the first time by Fedot Popov  and Semyon
Dezhnyov.

IMPERIAL RUSSIA
Main article: Russian EmpirePeter the Great, the first Emperor of RussiaUnder Peter the Great, Russia was proclaimed an Empire in 1721 and became recognized as a world power. Ruling from 1682 to 1725,
Peter defeated Sweden in the Great Northern War, forcing it to cede West Karelia  and Ingria  (two regions lost by Russia in the 
Time of Troubles),[67]  as well as Estland  and Livland, securing Russia's access to the sea and sea trade.[68]  On the Baltic Sea 
 Peter founded a new capital called Saint Petersburg, later known as Russia's "Window to Europe". Peter the Great's reforms 
brought considerable Western European cultural influences to Russia.

The reign of Peter I's daughter Elizabeth  in 1741–62 saw Russia's participation in the Seven Years' War  (1756–63). During this
conflict Russia annexed East Prussia  for a while and even took Berlin. However, upon Elisabeth's death, all these conquests were
returned to the Kingdom of Prussia  by pro-Prussian Peter III of Russia.

Catherine II  ("the Great"), who ruled in 1762–96, presided over the Age of Russian Enlightenment. She extended Russian political
control over the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and incorporated most of its territories into Russia during the Partitions of
Poland, pushing the Russian frontier westward into Central Europe. In the south, after successful Russo-Turkish Wars  against 
Ottoman Turkey, Catherine advanced Russia's boundary to the Black Sea, defeating the Crimean Khanate. As a result of victories
over Qajar Iran  through the Russo-Persian Wars, by the first half of the 19th century Russia also made significant territorial
gains in Transcaucasia  and the North Caucasus, forcing the former to irrevocably cede what is nowadays Georgia, Dagestan, 
Azerbaijan  and Armenia  to Russia.[69][70]  This continued with Alexander I's  (1801–25) wresting of Finland from the weakened
kingdom of Sweden in 1809 and of Bessarabia  from the Ottomans in 1812. At the same time, Russians colonized Alaska  and even
founded settlements in California, such as Fort Ross.

In 1803–1806, the first Russian circumnavigation  was made, later followed by other notable Russian sea exploration voyages. In
1820, a Russian expedition  discovered the continent of Antarctica.

In alliances with various European countries, Russia fought against Napoleon's France. The French invasion of Russia  at the
height of Napoleon's power in 1812 failed miserably as the obstinate resistance in combination with the bitterly cold Russian
winter  led to a disastrous defeat of invaders, in which more than 95% of the pan-European Grande Armée  perished.[71]  Led by 
Mikhail Kutuzov  and Barclay de Tolly, the Russian army ousted Napoleon from the country and drove through Europe in the war of
the Sixth Coalition, finally entering Paris. Alexander I headed Russia's delegation at the Congress of Vienna  that defined the
map of post-Napoleonic Europe.

The officers of the Napoleonic Wars  brought ideas of liberalism back to Russia with them and attempted to curtail the tsar's
powers during the abortive Decembrist revolt  of 1825. At the end of the conservative reign of Nicolas I  (1825–55), a zenith
period of Russia's power and influence in Europe was disrupted by defeat in the Crimean War. Between 1847 and 1851, about one
million people died of Asiatic cholera.[72]

Nicholas's successor Alexander II  (1855–81) enacted significant changes in the country, including the emancipation reform of 1861
. These Great Reforms  spurred industrialization and modernized the Russian army, which had successfully liberated Bulgaria from
Ottoman rule in the 1877–78 Russo-Turkish War.

Tsar Nicholas II of Russia.The late 19th century saw the rise of various socialist movements in Russia. Alexander II was killed in
1881 by revolutionary terrorists, and the reign of his son Alexander III  (1881–94) was less liberal but more peaceful. The last
Russian Emperor, Nicholas II  (1894–1917), was unable to prevent the events of the Russian Revolution of 1905, triggered by the
unsuccessful Russo-Japanese War  and the demonstration incident known as Bloody Sunday. The uprising was put down, but the
government was forced to concede major reforms, including granting the freedoms of speech  and assembly, the legalization of
political parties, and the creation of an elected legislative body, the State Duma of the Russian Empire. The Stolypin agrarian
reform  led to a massive peasant migration and settlement into Siberia. More than four million settlers arrived in that region
between 1906 and 1914.[73]

In 1914, Russia entered World War I  in response to Austria-Hungary's declaration of war on Russia's ally Serbia, and fought
across multiple fronts while isolated from its Triple Entente  allies. In 1916, the Brusilov Offensive  of the Russian Army almost
completely destroyed the military of Austria-Hungary. However, the already-existing public distrust of the regime was deepened by
the rising costs of war, high casualties, and rumors of corruption and treason. All this formed the climate for the Russian
Revolution  of 1917, carried out in two major acts.

REVOLUTION AND RUSSIAN REPUBLIC
Main articles: February Revolution, Russian Provisional Government, and Russian RepublicVladimir Lenin, the leader of the October
RevolutionThe February Revolution  forced Nicholas II  to abdicate; he and his family were imprisoned and later executed in Yekaterinburg 
during the Russian Civil War. The monarchy was replaced by a shaky coalition of political parties that declared itself the 
Provisional Government. An alternative socialist establishment existed alongside, the Petrograd Soviet, wielding power through the
democratically elected councils of workers and peasants, called Soviets. The rule of the new authorities only aggravated the
crisis in the country, instead of resolving it. Eventually, the October Revolution, led by Bolshevik  leader Vladimir Lenin,
overthrew the Provisional Government and gave full governing power to the Soviets, leading to the creation of the world's first 
socialist state.

SOVIET RUSSIA AND CIVIL WAR
Main articles: October Revolution  and Russian Civil WarSee also: Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic  and Russian
Constitution of 1918
The symbols of the early Soviet era: Tatlin's Tower  project and the giant Worker and Kolkhoz Woman  sculpture groupFollowing the
October Revolution, a civil war  broke out between the anti-Communist  White movement  and the new Soviet  regime with its Red
Army. Bolshevist Russia lost its Ukrainian, Polish, Baltic, and Finnish territories by signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk  that
concluded hostilities with the Central Powers  of World War I. The Allied powers  launched an unsuccessful military intervention 
in support of anti-Communist forces. In the meantime both the Bolsheviks and White movement carried out campaigns of deportations
and executions against each other, known respectively as the Red Terror  and White Terror. By the end of the civil war, Russia's
economy and infrastructure were heavily damaged. Millions became White émigrés,[74]  and the Povolzhye famine  of 1921 claimed up
to 5 million victims.[75]

SOVIET UNION
Main articles: Soviet Union  and History of the Soviet UnionSee also: Treaty on the Creation of the USSR
The Russian SFSR as a part of the USSR in 1922
The Russian SFSR as a part of the USSR in 1936, after intra-Soviet territorial changesThe Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic  (called Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic  at the time), together
with the Ukrainian, Byelorussian, and Transcaucasian Soviet Socialist Republics, formed  the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
(USSR), or Soviet Union, on December 30, 1922. Out of the 15 republics that would make up the USSR, the largest in size and over
half of the total USSR population was the Russian SFSR, which came to dominate the union for its entire 69-year history.

Following Lenin's  death in 1924, a troika  was designated to govern the Soviet Union. However, Joseph Stalin, an elected General
Secretary of the Communist Party, managed to suppress all opposition groups within the party and consolidate power in his hands. 
Leon Trotsky, the main proponent of world revolution, was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1929, and Stalin's idea of Socialism in
One Country  became the primary line. The continued internal struggle in the Bolshevik party culminated in the Great Purge, a
period of mass repressions in 1937–38, during which hundreds of thousands of people were executed, including original party
members  and military leaders accused of coup d'état  plots.[76]

Millions of Gulag inmates were forced to work on massive government projects such as the construction of the White Sea–Baltic
Canal  in 1931–1933Under Stalin's leadership, the government launched a planned economy, industrialisation of the largely rural country, and 
collectivization  of its agriculture. During this period of rapid economic and social change, millions of people were sent to 
penal labor camps,[77]  including many political convicts for their opposition to Stalin's rule; millions were deported and exiled 
 to remote areas of the Soviet Union.[77]  The transitional disorganisation of the country's agriculture, combined with the harsh
state policies and a drought, led to the Soviet famine of 1932–1933.[78]  The Soviet Union, though with a heavy price, was
transformed from a largely agrarian economy to a major industrial powerhouse in a short span of time.

The Appeasement  policy of Great Britain and France towards Adolf Hitler's annexation of Austria  and Czechoslovakia  did not stem
an increase in the power of Nazi Germany  and initiated a threat of war to the Soviet Union.[citation needed]  Around the same
time, the Third Reich  allied with the Empire of Japan, a rival of the USSR in the Far East and an open enemy of the USSR in the 
Soviet–Japanese Border Wars  in 1938–39.

The siege of Leningrad  during the World War II  was the deadliest siege of a city in historyIn August 1939, after another failure
of attempts to establish an anti-Nazi alliance with Britain and France,[citation needed]  the Soviet government decided to improve
relations with Germany by concluding the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, pledging non-aggression  between the two countries and dividing
Eastern Europe into their respective spheres of influence. While Hitler conquered Poland and France and other countries acted on a
single front at the start of World War II, the USSR was able to build up its military and claim some of the former territories of
the Russian Empire, Western Ukraine, Hertza region  and Northern Bukovina  as a result of the Soviet invasion of Poland, Winter
War, occupation of the Baltic states  and Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina.

On June 22, 1941, Nazi Germany broke the non-aggression treaty and invaded the Soviet Union with the largest and most powerful
invasion force in human history,[79]  opening the largest theater of World War II. Although the German army  had considerable
early success, their attack was halted in the Battle of Moscow. Subsequently, the Germans were dealt major defeats first at the 
Battle of Stalingrad  in the winter of 1942–43,[80]  and then in the Battle of Kursk  in the summer of 1943. Another German
failure was the Siege of Leningrad, in which the city was fully blockaded on land between 1941 and 1944 by German and Finnish
forces, and suffered starvation and more than a million deaths, but never surrendered.[81]  Under Stalin's administration and the
leadership of such commanders as Georgy Zhukov  and Konstantin Rokossovsky, Soviet forces took Eastern Europe in 1944–45 and 
captured Berlin  in May 1945. In August 1945 the Soviet Army  ousted the Japanese  from China's Manchukuo  and North Korea,
contributing to the allied victory over Japan.

The 1941–45 period of World War II is known in Russia as the "Great Patriotic War". The Soviet Union together with the United
States, the United Kingdom and China were considered as the Big Four  of Allied powers in World War II [82]  and later became the 
Four Policemen  which was the foundation of the United Nations Security Council.[83]  During this war, which included many of the 
most lethal battle operations  in human history, Soviet military and civilian deaths were 10.6 million and 15.9 million
respectively,[84]  accounting for about a third of all World War II casualties. The full demographic loss to the Soviet peoples
was even greater.[85]  The Soviet economy  and infrastructure suffered massive devastation which caused the Soviet famine of
1946–47[86]  but the Soviet Union emerged as an acknowledged military superpower on the continent.

Sputnik 1  was the world's first artificial satelliteAfter the war, Eastern and Central Europe including East Germany  and part of Austria  was occupied by Red Army  according to the 
Potsdam Conference. Dependent socialist governments were installed in the Eastern Bloc  satellite states. Becoming the world's
second nuclear weapons power, the USSR established the Warsaw Pact  alliance and entered into a struggle for global dominance,
known as the Cold War, with the United States and NATO. The Soviet Union supported revolutionary movements across the world,
including the newly formed People's Republic of China, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea  and, later on, the Republic of
Cuba. Significant amounts of Soviet resources were allocated in aid  to the other socialist states.[87]

After Stalin's death and a short period of collective rule, the new leader Nikita Khrushchev  denounced the cult of personality 
of Stalin and launched the policy of de-Stalinization. The penal labor system was reformed and many prisoners were released and
rehabilitated (many of them posthumously).[88]  The general easement of repressive policies became known later as the Khrushchev
Thaw. At the same time, tensions with the United States heightened when the two rivals clashed over the deployment of the United
States Jupiter missiles  in Turkey and Soviet missiles in Cuba.

In 1957, the Soviet Union  launched the world's first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, thus starting the Space Age. Russia's 
cosmonaut  Yuri Gagarin  became the first human to orbit the Earth, aboard the Vostok 1  manned spacecraft on April 12, 1961.

Following the ousting of Khrushchev in 1964, another period of collective rule  ensued, until Leonid Brezhnev  became the leader.
The era of the 1970s and the early 1980s was designated later as the Era of Stagnation, a period when economic growth slowed and
social policies became static. The 1965 Kosygin reform  aimed for partial decentralization  of the Soviet economy  and shifted the
emphasis from heavy industry  and weapons to light industry  and consumer goods  but was stifled by the conservative Communist
leadership.

Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev  and U.S. President Ronald Reagan  in Red Square during the Moscow Summit, May 31, 1988
In 1979, after a Communist-led revolution in Afghanistan, Soviet forces entered  that country at the request of the new regime.
The occupation drained economic resources and dragged on without achieving meaningful political results. Ultimately, the Soviet
Army was withdrawn from Afghanistan in 1989 due to international opposition, persistent anti-Soviet guerilla warfare, and a lack
of support by Soviet citizens.

From 1985 onwards, the last Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who sought to enact liberal reforms in the Soviet system, introduced
the policies of glasnost  (openness) and perestroika  (restructuring) in an attempt to end the period of economic stagnation  and
to democratise the government. This, however, led to the rise of strong nationalist and separatist movements. Prior to 1991, the
Soviet economy was the second largest in the world,[89]  but during its last years it was afflicted by shortages of goods in
grocery stores, huge budget deficits, and explosive growth in the money supply leading to inflation.[90]

Incumbent Russian President Boris Yeltsin  stands on a tank during the August Coup of 1991, two months after the presidential
electionBy 1991, economic and political turmoil began to boil over, as the Baltic republics chose to secede from the Soviet Union.
On March 17, a referendum  was held, in which the vast majority of participating citizens voted in favour of changing the Soviet
Union into a renewed federation. In August 1991, a coup d'état attempt  by members of Gorbachev's government, directed against
Gorbachev and aimed at preserving the Soviet Union, instead led to the end of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. On December
25, 1991, the USSR was dissolved  into 15 post-Soviet states.

RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Main article: History of Russia (1992–present)Moscow International Business CenterIn June 1991, Boris Yeltsin  became the first directly elected President in Russian history when he was elected President of the
Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, which became the independent Russian Federation in December of that year. During and
after the disintegration of the Soviet Union, wide-ranging reforms including privatization  and market and trade liberalization 
were undertaken,[91]  including radical changes along the lines of "shock therapy" as recommended by the United States and the 
International Monetary Fund.[92]  All this resulted in a major economic crisis, characterized by a 50% decline in both GDP and
industrial output between 1990 and 1995.[91][93]

The privatization largely shifted control of enterprises from state agencies to individuals with inside connections in the
government. Many of the newly rich moved billions in cash and assets outside of the country in an enormous capital flight.[94] 
The depression of the economy led to the collapse of social services; the birth rate  plummeted while the death rate  skyrocketed.

[95]  Millions plunged into poverty, from a level of 1.5% in the late Soviet era to 39–49% by mid-1993.[96]  The 1990s saw extreme
corruption and lawlessness, the rise of criminal gangs and violent crime.[97]

The 1990s were plagued by armed conflicts in the North Caucasus, both local ethnic skirmishes and separatist Islamist 
insurrections. From the time Chechen  separatists declared independence in the early 1990s, an intermittent guerrilla war  has
been fought between the rebel groups and the Russian military. Terrorist attacks against civilians  carried out by separatists,
most notably the Moscow theater hostage crisis  and Beslan school siege, caused hundreds of deaths and drew worldwide attention.

Russia took up the responsibility for settling the USSR's external debts, even though its population made up just half of the
population of the USSR at the time of its dissolution.[98]  High budget deficits caused the 1998 Russian financial crisis[99]  and
resulted in a further GDP decline.[91]

Boris Yeltsin  with Vladimir Putin  and Patriarch Alexy IIOn December 31, 1999, President Yeltsin unexpectedly resigned, handing
the post to the recently appointed Prime Minister, Vladimir Putin, who then won the 2000 presidential election. Putin suppressed
the Chechen insurgency  although sporadic violence still occurs throughout the Northern Caucasus. High oil prices  and the
initially weak currency followed by increasing domestic demand, consumption, and investments has helped the economy grow for nine
straight years, improving the standard of living and increasing Russia's influence on the world stage.[100]  However, since the
World economic crisis of 2008 and a subsequent drop in oil prices, Russia's economy has stagnated and poverty has again started to
rise.[101]  While many reforms made during the Putin presidency have been generally criticized by Western nations as undemocratic,

[102]  Putin's leadership over the return of order, stability, and progress has won him widespread admiration in Russia.[103]

On March 2, 2008, Dmitry Medvedev  was elected President of Russia while Putin became Prime Minister. Putin returned to the
presidency following the 2012 presidential elections, and Medvedev was appointed Prime Minister.

In 2014, after President Viktor Yanukovych  of Ukraine  fled as a result of a revolution, Putin requested and received
authorization from the Russian Parliament to deploy Russian troops to Ukraine.[104][105][106][107][108]  Following a Crimean
referendum  in which separation was favored by a large majority of voters, but not accepted internationally,[109][110][111][112]
[113][114]  the Russian leadership announced the accession of Crimea into the Russian Federation. On March 27 the United Nations
General Assembly voted in favor of a non-binding resolution opposing the Russian annexation of Crimea  by a vote of 100 in favour,
11 against and 58 abstentions.[115]

In September 2015, Russia started military intervention  in the Syrian Civil War, consisting of air strikes against militant
groups of the Islamic State, al-Nusra Front (al-Qaeda in the Levant), and the Army of Conquest.

POLITICS
Main article: Politics of RussiaGOVERNANCE
Moscow Kremlin, the working residence of the President of RussiaAccording to the Constitution of Russia, the country is a federation and semi-presidential  republic, wherein the President is the
 head of state[116]  and the Prime Minister  is the head of government. The Russian Federation is fundamentally structured as a 
multi-party  representative democracy, with the federal government composed of three branches:

 * Legislative: The bicameral  Federal Assembly of Russia, made up of the 450-member State Duma  and the 166-member Federation
   Council, adopts federal law, declares war, approves treaties, has the power of the purse  and the power of impeachment  of the
   President.
 * Executive: The President  is the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, can veto legislative bills  before they become
   law, and appoints the Government of Russia  (Cabinet) and other officers, who administer and enforce federal laws and policies.
 * Judiciary: The Constitutional Court, Supreme Court  and lower federal courts, whose judges are appointed by the Federation
   Council on the recommendation of the President, interpret laws and can overturn laws they deem unconstitutional.

The president is elected by popular vote for a six-year term (eligible for a second term, but not for a third consecutive term).
[117]  Ministries of the government are composed of the Premier and his deputies, ministers, and selected other individuals; all
are appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Prime Minister (whereas the appointment of the latter requires the
consent of the State Duma). Leading political parties in Russia include United Russia, the Communist Party, the Liberal
Democratic
Party, and A Just Russia. In 2013, Russia was ranked as 122nd of 167 countries in the Democracy Index, compiled by The Economist 
Intelligence Unit,[118]  while the World Justice Project  currently ranks Russia 80th of 99 countries surveyed in terms of rule of
law.[119]

FOREIGN RELATIONS
Main article: Foreign relations of Russia
As a transcontinental country, Russia is a member of both the Council of Europe  (COE) and the Asia Cooperation Dialogue.
The Russian Federation became the 39th member state of the Council of Europe  on February 28, 1996
Member states, observers and partners of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation  (SCO)The Russian Federation is recognized in
international law as a successor state  of the former Soviet Union.[30]  Russia continues to implement the international
commitments of the USSR, and has assumed the USSR's permanent seat in the UN Security Council, membership in other international
organisations, the rights and obligations under international treaties, and property and debts. Russia has a multifaceted foreign
policy. As of 2009[update], it maintains diplomatic relations with 191 countries and has 144 embassies. The foreign policy is
determined by the President and implemented by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia.[120]

As the successor to a former superpower, Russia's geopolitical status has often been debated, particularly in relation to 
unipolar
and multipolar  views on the global political system. While Russia is commonly accepted to be a great power, in recent years it
has been characterized by a number of world leaders,[121][122]  scholars,[123]  commentators and politicians[124]  as a currently
reinstating or potential superpower.[125][126][better source needed][127]

As one of five permanent members of the UN Security Council, Russia plays a major role in maintaining international peace and
security. The country participates in the Quartet on the Middle East  and the Six-party talks  with North Korea. Russia is a
member of the G8  industrialized nations, the Council of Europe, OSCE, and APEC. Russia usually takes a leading role in regional
organisations such as the CIS, EurAsEC, CSTO, and the SCO.[128]  Russia became the 39th member state of the Council of Europe in
1996.[129]  In 1998, Russia ratified the European Convention on Human Rights. The legal basis for EU relations with Russia is the
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, which came into force in 1997. The Agreement recalls the parties' shared respect for
democracy and human rights, political and economic freedom and commitment to international peace and security.[130]  In May 2003,
the EU and Russia agreed to reinforce their cooperation on the basis of common values and shared interests.[131]  Former President
Vladimir Putin had advocated a strategic partnership with close integration in various dimensions including establishment of 
EU-Russia Common Spaces.[132]  Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia has developed a friendlier relationship with the 
United States  and NATO. The NATO-Russia Council  was established in 2002 to allow the United States, Russia and the 27 allies in
NATO to work together as equal partners to pursue opportunities for joint collaboration.[133]

Leaders of the BRIC  nations in 2008: (l-r) Manmohan Singh  of India, Dmitry Medvedev  of Russia, Hu Jintao  of China and Luiz
Inácio Lula da Silva  of BrazilRussia maintains strong and positive relations with other BRIC countries. India  is the largest customer of Russian military
equipment and the two countries share extensive defense and strategic relations.[134]  In recent years, the country has
strengthened bilateral ties especially with the People's Republic of China  by signing the Treaty of Friendship  as well as
building the Trans-Siberian oil pipeline  and gas pipeline from Siberia to China.[135][136]

An important aspect of Russia's relations with the West is the criticism of Russia's political system and human rights  management
(including LGBT rights, media freedom, and reports about killed journalists) by Western governments, the mass media and the
leading democracy and human rights watchdogs. In particular, such organisations as the Amnesty International  and Human Rights
Watch  consider Russia to have not enough democratic attributes and to allow few political rights and civil liberties to its
citizens.[137][138]  Freedom House, an international organisation funded by the United States, ranks Russia as "not free", citing
"carefully engineered elections" and "absence" of debate.[139]  Russian authorities dismiss these claims and especially criticise
Freedom House. The Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has called the 2006 Freedom in the World  report "prefabricated", stating
that the human rights issues have been turned into a political weapon in particular by the United States. The ministry also claims
that such organisations as Freedom House and Human Rights Watch use the same scheme of voluntary extrapolation of "isolated facts
that of course can be found in any country"  into dominant tendencies.[140]

MILITARY
Main article: Russian Armed ForcesMilitary-patriotic recreation park of the Armed Forces of the Russian FederationThe Russian
military is divided into the Ground Forces, Navy, and Air Force. There are also three independent arms of service: Strategic
Missile Troops, Aerospace Defence Forces, and the Airborne Troops. In 2006, the military had 1.037 million personnel on active
duty.[141]  It is mandatory for all male citizens aged 18–27 to be drafted  for a year of service in Armed Forces.[100]

Russia has the largest stockpile of nuclear weapons  in the world. It has the second largest fleet of ballistic missile submarines 
 and is the only country apart from the United States with a modern strategic bomber  force.[35][142]  Russia's tank  force is the
largest in the world, its surface navy and air force are among the largest ones.

The country has a large and fully indigenous arms industry, producing most of its own military equipment with only few types of
weapons imported. Russia is one of the world's top supplier of arms, a spot it has held since 2001, accounting for around 30% of
worldwide weapons sales[143]  and exporting weapons to about 80 countries.[144]  The Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, SIPRI, found that Russia was the second biggest exporter of arms in 2010-14, increasing their exports by 37 per cent
from the period 2005-2009. In 2010-14, Russia delivered weapons to 56 states and to rebel forces in eastern Ukraine.[145]

The Russian government's published 2014 military budget is about 2.49 trillion rubles  (approximately US$69.3 billion), the third
largest  in the world behind the US and China. The official budget is set to rise to 3.03 trillion rubles (approximately US$83.7
billion) in 2015, and 3.36 trillion rubles (approximately US$93.9 billion) in 2016.[146]  However, unofficial estimates put the
budget significantly higher, for example the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute  (SIPRI) 2013 Military Expenditure
Database estimated Russia's military expenditure in 2012 at US$90.749 billion.[147]  This estimate is an increase of more than
US$18 billion on SIPRI's estimate of the Russian military budget for 2011 (US$71.9 billion).[148]  As of 2014[update], Russia's
military budget is higher than any other European nation.

According to 2012 Global Peace Index, Russia is the sixth least peaceful out of 162 countries in the world, principally because of
its defense industry. Russia has historically ranked low on the index since its inception in 2007.[149]

POLITICAL DIVISIONS
Main article: Subdivisions of Russia
Russian President Vladimir Putin  and Akhmad Kadyrov, former rebel and head of the Chechen Republic, 2000
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev  and President of Tatarstan Mintimer Shaimiyev  in Kazan, the capital of Tatarstan, 2011Federal
subjectsAccording to the Constitution, the country comprises eighty-five federal subjects,[150]  including the Republic of Crimea  and the
 federal city  of Sevastopol, whose recent establishment is internationally disputed and criticized as illegal annexation.[151] 
In 1993, when the Constitution was adopted, there were eighty-nine federal subjects listed, but later some of them were merged.
These subjects have equal representation—two delegates each—in the Federation Council.[152]  However, they differ in the degree of
autonomy they enjoy.

 * 46 oblasts  (provinces): most common type of federal subjects, with locally elected governor and legislature.[153]
 * 22 republics: nominally autonomous; each is tasked with drafting its own constitution, direct-elected[153]  head of republic
   [154]  or a similar post, and parliament. Republics are allowed to establish their own official language alongside Russian but
   are represented by the federal government in international affairs. Republics are meant to be home to specific ethnic
   minorities.
 * 9 krais  (territories): essentially the same as oblasts. The "territory" designation is historic, originally given to frontier
   regions and later also to the administrative divisions that comprised autonomous okrugs or autonomous oblasts.
 * 4 autonomous okrugs  (autonomous districts): originally autonomous entities within oblasts and krais created for ethnic
   minorities, their status was elevated to that of federal subjects in the 1990s. With the exception of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug
   , all autonomous okrugs are still administratively subordinated to a krai or an oblast of which they are a part.
 * 1 autonomous oblast  (the Jewish Autonomous Oblast): historically, autonomous oblasts were administrative units subordinated to
   krais. In 1990, all of them except for the Jewish AO were elevated in status to that of a republic.
 * 3 federal cities  (Moscow, Saint Petersburg, and Sevastopol): major cities that function as separate regions.

Further information: Political status of Crimea and Sevastopol  and 2014 Crimean crisisFederal districtsFederal subjects are
grouped into eight federal districts, each administered by an envoy appointed by the President of Russia.[155]  Unlike the federal
subjects, the federal districts are not a subnational level of government, but are a level of administration of the federal
government. Federal districts' envoys serve as liaisons between the federal subjects and the federal government and are primarily
responsible for overseeing the compliance of the federal subjects with the federal laws.

GEOGRAPHY
Main article: Geography of RussiaSee also: List of Russian explorersMoscowSt. PetersburgNovgorodNovosibirskYekaterinburg
Nizhny NovgorodKazanChelyabinskOmskSamaraRostovUfaKrasnoyarskPermVoronezhVolgogradArkhangelskPyatigorskSochiIrkutskYakutsk
KhabarovskVladivostokMagadanYuzhno-SakhalinskPetropavlovsk-KamchatskyKaliningradKöppen climate types  of RussiaRussia is the largest country in the world; its total area is 17,125,200 square kilometres (6,612,100 sq mi).[156][157]  There are
23 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Russia, 40 UNESCO biosphere reserves,[158]  41 national parks  and 101 nature reserves. It lies
between latitudes 41°  and 82° N, and longitudes 19° E  and 169° W.

Russia's territorial expansion was achieved largely in the late 16th century under the Cossack Yermak Timofeyevich  during the
reign of Ivan the Terrible, at a time when competing city-states in the western regions of Russia had banded together to form one
country. Yermak mustered an army and pushed eastward where he conquered nearly all the lands once belonging to the Mongols,
defeating their ruler, Khan Kuchum.[159]

Russia has a wide natural resource base, including major deposits of timber, petroleum, natural gas, coal, ores and other mineral
resources.

TOPOGRAPHY
The two most widely separated points in Russia are about 8,000 km (4,971 mi) apart along a geodesic  line. These points are: a
60 km (37 mi) long Vistula Spit  the boundary with Poland separating the Gdańsk Bay  from the Vistula Lagoon  and the most
southeastern point of the Kuril Islands. The points which are farthest separated in longitude  are 6,600 km (4,101 mi) apart along
a geodesic line. These points are: in the west, the same spit on the boundary with Poland, and in the east, the Big Diomede Island
. The Russian Federation spans nine time zones.

Mount Elbrus, the highest point of the Caucasus, Russia and EuropeMost of Russia consists of vast stretches of plains that are
predominantly steppe  to the south and heavily forested to the north, with tundra  along the northern coast. Russia possesses 10%
of the world's arable land.[160]  Mountain ranges are found along the southern borders, such as the Caucasus  (containing Mount
Elbrus, which at 5,642 m (18,510 ft) is the highest point in both Russia and Europe) and the Altai  (containing Mount Belukha,
which at the 4,506 m (14,783 ft) is the highest point of Siberia outside of the Russian Far East); and in the eastern parts, such
as the Verkhoyansk Range  or the volcanoes of Kamchatka Peninsula  (containing Klyuchevskaya Sopka, which at the 4,750 m
(15,584 ft) is the highest active volcano  in Eurasia as well as the highest point of Asian Russia). The Ural Mountains, rich in
mineral resources, form a north-south range that divides Europe and Asia.

Russia has an extensive coastline of over 37,000 km (22,991 mi) along the Arctic and Pacific Oceans, as well as along the Baltic
Sea, Sea of Azov, Black Sea  and Caspian Sea.[100]  The Barents Sea, White Sea, Kara Sea, Laptev Sea, East Siberian Sea, Chukchi
Sea, Bering Sea, Sea of Okhotsk, and the Sea of Japan  are linked to Russia via the Arctic and Pacific. Russia's major islands and
archipelagos include Novaya Zemlya, the Franz Josef Land, the Severnaya Zemlya, the New Siberian Islands, Wrangel Island, the 
Kuril Islands, and Sakhalin. The Diomede Islands  (one controlled by Russia, the other by the United States) are just 3 km
(1.9 mi) apart, and Kunashir Island  is about 20 km (12.4 mi) from Hokkaido, Japan.

Volga River  in Samara OblastRussia has thousands of rivers  and inland bodies of water, providing it with one of the world's largest surface water resources.
Its lakes contain approximately one-quarter of the world's liquid fresh water.[161]  The largest and most prominent of Russia's
bodies of fresh water is Lake Baikal, the world's deepest, purest, oldest and most capacious fresh water lake.[162]  Baikal alone
contains over one-fifth of the world's fresh surface water.[161]  Other major lakes include Ladoga  and Onega, two of the largest
lakes in Europe. Russia is second only to Brazil in volume of the total renewable water resources. Of the country's 100,000
rivers,[163]  the Volga  is the most famous, not only because it is the longest river in Europe, but also because of its major
role in Russian history.[100]  The Siberian rivers Ob, Yenisey, Lena  and Amur  are among the longest rivers in the world.

CLIMATE
Main article: Climate of RussiaTaiga  forest, Yugyd Va National Park  in the Komi RepublicSochi, Black Sea  coastThe enormous size
of Russia and the remoteness of many areas from the sea result in the dominance of the humid continental climate, which is
prevalent in all parts of the country except for the tundra and the extreme southeast. Mountains in the south obstruct the flow of
warm air masses from the Indian Ocean, while the plain of the west and north makes the country open to Arctic and Atlantic
influences.[164]

Most of Northern European Russia and Siberia has a subarctic climate, with extremely severe winters in the inner regions of
Northeast Siberia (mostly the Sakha Republic, where the Northern Pole of Cold  is located with the record low temperature of
−71.2 °C or −96.2 °F), and more moderate winters elsewhere. Both the strip of land along the shore of the Arctic Ocean and the 
Russian Arctic islands  have a polar climate.

The coastal part of Krasnodar Krai  on the Black Sea, most notably in Sochi, possesses a humid subtropical climate  with mild and
wet winters. In many regions of East Siberia and the Far East, winter is dry compared to summer; other parts of the country
experience more even precipitation across seasons. Winter precipitation in most parts of the country usually falls as snow. The
region along the Lower Volga and Caspian Sea coast, as well as some areas of southernmost Siberia, possesses a semi-arid climate.

Climate data for Russia (records)MonthJanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecYearRecord high °C (°F)22.2
(72)23.8
(74.8)30.3
(86.5)34.0
(93.2)37.7
(99.9)43.2
(109.8)45.4
(113.7)43.5
(110.3)41.5
(106.7)33.7
(92.7)29.1
(84.4)25.0
(77)45.4
(113.7)Record low °C (°F)−71.2
(−96.2)−64.4
(−83.9)−60.6
(−77.1)−46.4
(−51.5)−28.9
(−20)−9.7
(14.5)−9.3
(15.3)−17.1
(1.2)−25.3
(−13.5)−47.6
(−53.7)−58.5
(−73.3)−62.8
(−81)−71.2
(−96.2)Source: Pogoda.ru.net[165]Throughout much of the territory there are only two distinct seasons—winter and summer—as spring
and autumn are usually brief periods of change between extremely low and extremely high temperatures.[164]  The coldest month is
January (February on the coastline); the warmest is usually July. Great ranges of temperature are typical. In winter, temperatures
get colder both from south to north and from west to east. Summers can be quite hot, even in Siberia.[166]  The continental
interiors are the driest areas.

BIODIVERSITY
Main articles: List of ecoregions in Russia, List of mammals of Russia, List of birds of Russia, List of freshwater fish of Russia
, and Wildlife of Russia
The brown bear  is a popular symbol of Russia, particularly in the West.From north to south the East European Plain, also known as Russian Plain, is clad sequentially in Arctic tundra, coniferous forest
(taiga), mixed and broad-leaf forests, grassland (steppe), and semi-desert (fringing the Caspian Sea), as the changes in
vegetation reflect the changes in climate. Siberia supports a similar sequence but is largely taiga. Russia has the world's
largest forest reserves,[167]  known as "the lungs of Europe",[168]  second only to the Amazon Rainforest  in the amount of 
carbon
dioxide  it absorbs.

There are 266 mammal species and 780 bird species in Russia. A total of 415 animal species have been included in the Red Data
Book
of the Russian Federation  as of 1997 and are now protected.[169]

ECONOMY
Main articles: Economy of Russia  and Timeline of largest projects in the Russian economy
World Trade Center in MoscowRussia has a developed, high-income  market economy  with enormous natural resources, particularly oil  and natural gas. It has
the 15th largest  economy in the world by nominal GDP and the 6th largest  by purchasing power parity  (PPP). Since the turn of
the 21st century, higher domestic consumption and greater political stability have bolstered economic growth in Russia. The
country ended 2008 with its ninth straight year of growth, but growth has slowed with the decline in the price of oil and gas.
Real GDP per capita, PPP (current international) was 19,840 in 2010.[170]  Growth was primarily driven by non-traded services and
goods for the domestic market, as opposed to oil or mineral extraction and exports.[100]  The average nominal salary in Russia was
$967 per month in early 2013, up from $80 in 2000.[171][172]  In March 2014 the average nominal monthly wages reached 30,000 RUR
(or US$980),[173][174]  while tax on the income of individuals is payable at the rate of 13% on most incomes.[175]  Approximately
12.8% of Russians lived below the national poverty line  in 2011,[176]  significantly down from 40% in 1998 at the worst point of
the post-Soviet collapse.[96]  Unemployment in Russia was 5.4% in 2014, down from about 12.4% in 1999.[177]  The middle class has
grown from just 8 million persons in 2000 to 104 million persons in 2013.[178][179]  However, after United States-led sanctions
since 2014 and a collapse in oil prices, the proportion of middle-class could halve to 20%.[180]  Sugar imports reportedly dropped
82% between 2012 and 2013 as a result of the increase in domestic output.[181]

Russian economy since the end of the Soviet UnionOil, natural gas, metals, and timber account for more than 80% of Russian exports
abroad.[100]  Since 2003, the exports of natural resources started decreasing in economic importance as the internal market
strengthened considerably. Despite higher energy prices, oil and gas only contribute to 5.7% of Russia's GDP and the government
predicts this will be 3.7% by 2011.[182]  Oil export earnings allowed Russia to increase its foreign reserves from $12 billion in
1999 to $597.3 billion on August 1, 2008, the third largest foreign exchange reserves  in the world.[183]  The macroeconomic
policy under Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin  was prudent and sound, with excess income being stored in the Stabilization Fund of
Russia.[184]  In 2006, Russia repaid most of its formerly massive debts,[185]  leaving it with one of the lowest foreign debts
among major economies.[186]  The Stabilization Fund helped Russia to come out of the global financial crisis  in a much better
state than many experts had expected.[184]

A simpler, more streamlined tax code adopted in 2001 reduced the tax burden on people and dramatically increased state revenue.
[187]  Russia has a flat tax  rate of 13%. This ranks it as the country with the second most attractive personal tax system for
single managers in the world after the United Arab Emirates.[188]  According to Bloomberg, Russia is considered well ahead of most
other resource-rich countries in its economic development, with a long tradition of education, science, and industry.[189]  The
country has a higher proportion of higher education graduates than any other country in Eurasia.[190]

On May 21, 2014, Russia and China  signed a $400 billion gas deal. Starting 2019 Russia plans to provide natural gas  to China for
the next 30 years.The economic development of the country has been uneven geographically with the Moscow region contributing a very large share  of
the country's GDP.[191]  Inequality of household income and wealth has also been noted, with Credit Suisse finding Russian wealth
distribution so much more extreme than other countries studied it "deserves to be placed in a separate category."[192][193] 
Another problem is modernisation of infrastructure, ageing and inadequate after years of being neglected in the 1990s; the
government has said $1 trillion will be invested in development of infrastructure by 2020.[194]  In December 2011, Russia finally[

clarification needed]  joined the World Trade Organisation, allowing it a greater access to overseas markets. Some analysts
estimate that WTO membership could bring the Russian economy a bounce of up to 3% annually.[195]  Russia ranks as the second-most
corrupt country in Europe (after Ukraine), according to the Corruption Perceptions Index. The Norwegian-Russian Chamber of
Commerce also states that "[c]orruption is one of the biggest problems both Russian and international companies have to deal
with".[196]  The high rate of corruption acts as a hidden tax as businesses and individuals often have to pay money that is not
part of the official tax rate. It is estimated that corruption is costing the Russian economy an estimated $2 billion (80 billion
rubles) per year.[197]  In 2014, a book-length study by Professor Karen Dawisha was published concerning corruption in Russian
under Putin's government.[198]

The Russian central bank announced plans in 2013 to free float the Russian ruble in 2015. According to a stress test conducted by
the central bank Russian financial system would be able to handle a currency decline of 25%–30% without major central bank
interference. However, Russian economy began stagnating in late 2013 and in combination with the War in Donbass  is in danger of
entering stagflation, slow growth and high inflation. The Russian ruble collapsed by 24% from October 2013 to October 2014
entering the level where the central bank may need to intervene to strengthen the currency. Moreover, after bringing inflation
down to 3.6% in 2012, the lowest rate since gaining independence from the Soviet Union, inflation in Russia jumped to nearly 7.5%
in 2014, causing the central bank to increase its lending rate to 8% from 5.5% in 2013.[199][200][201]  In an October 2014 article
in Bloomberg Business Week, it was reported that Russia had significantly started shifting its economy towards China in response
to increasing financial tensions following its annexation of Crimea and subsequent Western economic sanctions.[202]

AGRICULTURE
Main articles: Agriculture in Russia  and Fishing industry in RussiaRye Fields, by Ivan Shishkin. Russia is the world's top
producer of barley, buckwheat  and oats, and one of the largest producers and exporters of rye, sunflower seed  and wheat.Russia's
 total area of cultivated land  is estimated at 1,237,294 square kilometres (477,722 sq mi), the fourth largest in the world.[203] 
 From 1999 to 2009, Russia's agriculture grew steadily,[204]  and the country turned from a grain importer to the third largest
grain exporter after the EU and the United States.[205]  The production of meat has grown from 6,813,000 tonnes in 1999 to
9,331,000 tonnes in 2008, and continues to grow.[206]

This restoration of agriculture was supported by a credit policy of the government, helping both individual farmers and large
privatized corporate farms that once were Soviet kolkhozes  and which still own the significant share of agricultural land.[207] 
While large farms concentrate mainly on grain production and husbandry  products, small private household plots  produce most of
the country's potatoes, vegetables and fruits.[208]

Since Russia borders three oceans (the Atlantic, Arctic, and Pacific), Russian fishing fleets are a major world fish supplier.
Russia captured 3,191,068 tons of fish in 2005.[209]  Both exports and imports of fish and sea products grew significantly in
recent years, reaching $2,415 and $2,036 million, respectively, in 2008.[210]

Sprawling from the Baltic Sea to the Pacific Ocean, Russia has more than a fifth of the world's forests, which makes it the
largest forest country in the world.[167][211]  However, according to a 2012 study by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the
United Nations  and the Government of the Russian Federation,[212]  the considerable potential of Russian forests is underutilized
and Russia's share of the global trade in forest products is less than four percent.[213]

ENERGY
Main articles: Energy in Russia  and Nuclear power in Russia
Russia is a key oil  and gas  supplier to much of Europe.In recent years, Russia has frequently been described in the media as an energy superpower.[214][215]  The country has the world's
largest natural gas reserves,[216]  the 8th largest oil reserves,[217]  and the second largest coal reserves.[218]  Russia is the
world's leading natural gas exporter[219]  and second largest natural gas producer,[34]  while also the largest oil exporter  and
the largest oil producer.[33]

Russia is the 3rd largest electricity producer  in the world[220]  and the 5th largest renewable energy producer, the latter
because of the well-developed hydroelectricity  production in the country.[221]  Large cascades of hydropower plants  are built in
European Russia along big rivers like the Volga. The Asian part of Russia also features a number of major hydropower stations,
however the gigantic hydroelectric potential of Siberia and the Russian Far East largely remains unexploited.

Russia was the first country to develop civilian nuclear power and to construct the world's first nuclear power plant. Currently
the country is the 4th largest nuclear energy producer,[222]  with all nuclear power in Russia  being managed by Rosatom  State
Corporation. The sector is rapidly developing, with an aim of increasing the total share of nuclear energy from current 16.9% to
23% by 2020. The Russian government plans to allocate 127 billion rubles ($5.42 billion) to a federal program dedicated to the
next generation of nuclear energy technology. About 1 trillion rubles ($42.7 billion) is to be allocated from the federal budget
to nuclear power and industry development before 2015.[223]

In May 2014 on a two-day trip to Shanghai, President Putin signed a deal on behalf of Gazprom for the Russian energy giant to 
supply China  with 38 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year. Construction of a pipeline to facilitate the deal was agreed
whereby Russia would contribute $55bn to the cost, and China $22bn, in what Putin described as "the world's biggest construction
project for the next four years." The natural gas would begin to flow sometime between 2018 and 2020 and would continue for 30
years at an ultimate cost to China of $400bn.[224]

TRANSPORT
Main articles: Transport in Russia, History of rail transport in Russia, and Rail transport in Russia
The marker for kilometre 9288 at the end of the Trans-Siberian Railway  in VladivostokRailway transport in Russia is mostly under
the control of the state-run Russian Railways  monopoly. The company accounts for over 3.6% of Russia's GDP and handles 39% of the
total freight traffic (including pipelines) and more than 42% of passenger traffic.[225]  The total length of common-used railway
tracks exceeds 85,500 km (53,127 mi),[225]  second only to the United States. Over 44,000 km (27,340 mi) of tracks are electrified
,[226]  which is the largest number in the world, and additionally there are more than 30,000 km (18,641 mi) of industrial
non-common carrier lines. Railways in Russia, unlike in the most of the world, use broad gauge  of 1,520 mm  (4 ft1127⁄32 in),
with the exception of 957 km (595 mi) on Sakhalin  island using narrow gauge of 1,067 mm  (3 ft 6 in). The most renowned railway
in Russia is Trans-Siberian  (Transsib), spanning a record 7 time zones and serving the longest single continuous services in the
world, Moscow-Vladivostok  (9,259 km (5,753 mi)), Moscow–Pyongyang  (10,267 km (6,380 mi))[227]  and Kiev–Vladivostok (11,085 km
(6,888 mi)).[228]

As of 2006[update]  Russia had 933,000 km of roads, of which 755,000 were paved.[229]  Some of these make up the Russian federal
motorway system. With a large land area the road density is the lowest of all the G8  and BRIC  countries.[230]

Much of Russia's inland waterways, which total 102,000 km (63,380 mi), are made up of natural rivers or lakes. In the European
part of the country the network of channels connects the basins of major rivers. Russia's capital, Moscow, is sometimes called
"the port of the five seas", because of its waterway connections to the Baltic, White, Caspian, Azov  and Black Seas.

Yamal, one of Russia's nuclear-powered icebreakers[231]Major sea ports of Russia include Rostov-on-Don  on the Azov Sea, Novorossiysk  on the Black Sea, Astrakhan  and Makhachkala  on
the Caspian, Kaliningrad  and St Petersburg on the Baltic, Arkhangelsk  on the White Sea, Murmansk  on the Barents Sea, 
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky  and Vladivostok  on the Pacific Ocean. In 2008 the country owned 1,448 merchant marine  ships. The
world's only fleet of nuclear-powered icebreakers  advances the economic exploitation of the Arctic continental shelf of Russia 
and the development of sea trade through the Northern Sea Route  between Europe and East Asia.

By total length of pipelines  Russia is second only to the United States. Currently many new pipeline projects are being realized,
including Nord Stream  and South Stream  natural gas pipelines to Europe, and the Eastern Siberia – Pacific Ocean oil pipeline 
(ESPO) to the Russian Far East and China.

Russia has 1,216 airports,[232]  the busiest being Sheremetyevo, Domodedovo, and Vnukovo  in Moscow, and Pulkovo  in St.
Petersburg.

Typically, major Russian cities have well-developed systems of public transport, with the most common varieties of exploited
vehicles being bus, trolleybus  and tram. Seven Russian cities, namely Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Nizhny Novgorod, Novosibirsk, 
Samara, Yekaterinburg, and Kazan, have underground metros, while Volgograd  features a metrotram. The total length of metros in
Russia is 465.4 kilometres (289.2 mi). Moscow Metro  and Saint Petersburg Metro  are the oldest in Russia, opened in 1935 and 1955
respectively. These two are among the fastest and busiest metro systems  in the world, and are famous for rich decorations and
unique designs of their stations, which is a common tradition in Russian metros and railways.

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Main articles: Timeline of Russian inventions and technology records, Science and technology in Russia, List of Russian scientists
, and List of Russian inventorsMikhail Lomonosov, polymath  scientist, inventor, poet and artistIvan Pavlov  (1849–1936),
physiologist, Nobel Prize laureate in 1904Science and technology in Russia blossomed since the Age of Enlightenment, when Peter the Great  founded the Russian Academy of
Sciences  and Saint Petersburg State University, and polymath  Mikhail Lomonosov  established the Moscow State University, paving
the way for a strong native tradition in learning and innovation. In the 19th and 20th centuries the country produced a large
number of notable scientists and inventors.

The Russian physics school  began with Lomonosov who proposed the law of conservation of matter preceding the energy conservation
law. Russian discoveries and inventions in physics include the electric arc, electrodynamical Lenz's law, space groups  of 
crystals, photoelectric cell, superfluidity, Cherenkov radiation, electron paramagnetic resonance, heterotransistors  and 3D
holography. Lasers  and masers  were co-invented by Nikolai Basov  and Alexander Prokhorov, while the idea of tokamak  for
controlled nuclear fusion  was introduced by Igor Tamm, Andrei Sakharov  and Lev Artsimovich, leading eventually the modern
international ITER  project, where Russia is a party.

Since the time of Nikolay Lobachevsky  (the "Copernicus  of Geometry" who pioneered the non-Euclidean geometry) and a prominent
tutor Pafnuty Chebyshev, the Russian mathematical school  became one of the most influential in the world.[233]  Chebyshev's
students included Aleksandr Lyapunov, who founded the modern stability theory, and Andrey Markov  who invented the Markov chains.
In the 20th century Soviet mathematicians, such as Andrey Kolmogorov, Israel Gelfand, and Sergey Sobolev, made major contributions
to various areas of mathematics. Nine Soviet/Russian mathematicians were awarded with Fields Medal, a most prestigious award in
mathematics. Recently Grigori Perelman  was offered the first ever Clay Millennium Prize Problems  Award for his final proof of
the Poincaré conjecture  in 2002.[234]

Russian chemist  Dmitry Mendeleev  invented the Periodic table, the main framework of modern chemistry. Aleksandr Butlerov  was
one of the creators of the theory of chemical structure, playing a central role in organic chemistry. Russian biologists  include 
Dmitry Ivanovsky  who discovered viruses, Ivan Pavlov  who was the first to experiment with the classical conditioning, and Ilya
Mechnikov  who was a pioneer researcher of the immune system  and probiotics.

Many Russian scientists and inventors were émigrés, like Igor Sikorsky, who built the first airliners  and modern-type
helicopters; Vladimir Zworykin, often called the father of TV; chemist Ilya Prigogine, noted for his work on dissipative
structures  and complex systems; Nobel Prize-winning economists Simon Kuznets  and Wassily Leontief; physicist Georgiy Gamov  (an
author of the Big Bang  theory) and social scientist Pitirim Sorokin. Many foreigners worked in Russia for a long time, like 
Leonard Euler  and Alfred Nobel.

Russian inventions  include arc welding  by Nikolay Benardos, further developed by Nikolay Slavyanov, Konstantin Khrenov  and
other Russian engineers. Gleb Kotelnikov  invented the knapsack parachute, while Evgeniy Chertovsky  introduced the pressure suit.
 Alexander Lodygin  and Pavel Yablochkov  were pioneers of electric lighting, and Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky  introduced the first
 three-phase electric power  systems, widely used today. Sergei Lebedev  invented the first commercially viable and mass-produced
type of synthetic rubber. The first ternary computer, Setun, was developed by Nikolay Brusentsov.

The Sukhoi PAK FA  is a fifth-generation jet fighter  being developed for the Russian Air Force.In the 20th century a number of
prominent Soviet aerospace engineers, inspired by the fundamental works of Nikolai Zhukovsky, Sergei Chaplygin  and others,
designed many hundreds of models of military and civilian aircraft and founded a number of KBs  (Construction Bureaus) that now
constitute the bulk of Russian United Aircraft Corporation. Famous Russian aircraft include the civilian Tu-series, Su  and MiG
fighter aircraft, Ka  and Mi-series helicopters; many Russian aircraft models are on the list of most produced aircraft  in
history.

Famous Russian battle tanks include T34, the most heavily produced tank design of World War II,[235]  and further tanks of
T-series, including the most produced tank in history, T54/55.[236]  The AK47  and AK74  by Mikhail Kalashnikov  constitute the
most widely used type of assault rifle  throughout the world—so much so that more AK-type rifles have been manufactured than all
other assault rifles combined.[237]

With all these achievements, however, since the late Soviet era Russia was lagging behind the West in a number of technologies,
mostly those related to energy conservation  and consumer goods  production. The crisis of the 1990s led to the drastic reduction
of the state support for science and a brain drain  migration from Russia.

In the 2000s, on the wave of a new economic boom, the situation in the Russian science and technology has improved, and the
government launched a campaign  aimed into modernisation and innovation. Russian President Dmitry Medvedev formulated top
priorities for the country's technological development:

 * Efficient energy use
 * Information technology, including both common products and the products combined with space technology
 * Nuclear energy
 * Pharmaceuticals[238]

Currently Russia has completed the GLONASS  satellite navigation system. The country is developing its own fifth-generation jet
fighter  and constructing the first serial mobile nuclear plant  in the world.

SPACE EXPLORATION
Soviet and Russian space station  MirSoyuz TMA-2  is launched from Baikonur, Kazakhstan, carrying one of the first resident crews
to the International Space StationRussian achievements in the field of space technology  and space exploration  are traced back to Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the
father of theoretical astronautics.[239]  His works had inspired leading Soviet rocket engineers, such as Sergey Korolyov, 
Valentin Glushko, and many others who contributed to the success of the Soviet space program  on early stages of the Space Race 
and beyond.

In 1957 the first Earth-orbiting artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, was launched; in 1961 the first human trip into space was
successfully made by Yury Gagarin. Many other Soviet and Russian space exploration records  ensued, including the first spacewalk 
performed by Alexey Leonov, Luna 9  was the first spacecraft to land on the Moon, Venera 7  was the first to land on another
planet (Venus), Mars 3  then the first to land on Mars, the first space exploration rover  Lunokhod 1  and the first space station 
 Salyut 1  and Mir.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, some government-funded space exploration programs, including the Buran  space shuttle
program, were cancelled or delayed, while participation of the Russian space industry in commercial activities and international
cooperation intensified. Nowadays Russia is the largest satellite launcher.[240]  After the United States Space Shuttle  program
ended in 2011, Soyuz rockets  became the only provider of transport for astronauts at the International Space Station.

WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION
Main article: Water supply and sanitation in RussiaIn Russia, approximately 70 per cent of drinking water comes from surface water
and 30 per cent from groundwater. In 2004, water supply systems had a total capacity of 90 million cubic metres a day. The average
residential water use was 248 litres per capita per day.[241]  One fourth of the world's fresh surface and groundwater  is located
in Russia. The water utilities sector is one of the largest industries in Russia serving the entire Russian population.

DEMOGRAPHICS
Main articles: Demographics of Russia  and RossiyanePercentage of ethnic Russians by region in 2010 >80% 70—79% 50—69% 20—49% <20%
Natural population growth rate in Russia, 2015.Ethnic Russians comprise 81% of the country's population.[1]  The Russian Federation is also home to several sizeable minorities.
In all, 160 different other ethnic groups and indigenous peoples live within its borders.[242]  Though Russia's population is
comparatively large, its density is low  because of the country's enormous size. Population is densest in European Russia, near
the Ural Mountains, and in southwest Siberia. 73% of the population lives in urban areas while 27% in rural ones.[243]  The
results of the 2010 Census  show a total population of 142,856,536.[244]

Russia's population peaked at 148,689,000 in 1991, just before the dissolution of the Soviet Union. It began to experience a rapid
decline starting in the mid-1990s.[245]  The decline has slowed to near stagnation in recent years because of reduced death rates,
increased birth rates  and increased immigration.[246]

In 2009, Russia recorded annual population growth for the first time in fifteen years, with total growth of 10,500.[246]  279,906
migrants arrived to the Russian Federation the same year, of which 93% came from CIS  countries.[246]  The number of Russian
emigrants steadily declined from 359,000 in 2000 to 32,000 in 2009.[246]  There are also an estimated 10 million illegal
immigrants  from the ex-Soviet states in Russia.[247]  Russia is home to approximately 116 million ethnic Russians[242]  and about
20 million ethnic Russians live outside Russia in the former republics of the Soviet Union,[248]  mostly in Ukraine and
Kazakhstan.[249]

The 2010 census  recorded 81% of the population as ethnically Russian, and 19% as other ethnicities:[1]  3.7% Tatars; 1.4% 
Ukrainians; 1.1% Bashkirs; 1% Chuvashes; 11.8% others and unspecified. According to the Census, 84.93% of the Russian population
belongs to European ethnic groups (Slavic, Germanic, Finnic other than Ugric, Greek, and others). This is a decline from the 2002,
when they constituted for more than 86% of the population.[1]

Russia's birth rate is higher than that of most European countries (13.3 births per 1000 people in 2014[246]  compared to the 
European Union  average of 10.1 per 1000),[250]  but its death rate is also substantially higher (in 2014, Russia's death rate was
13.1 per 1000 people[246]  compared to the EU average of 9.7 per 1000).[250]  The Russian Ministry of Health and Social Affairs
predicted that by 2011 the death rate would equal the birth rate because of increase in fertility and decline in mortality.[251] 
The government is implementing a number of programs designed to increase the birth rate and attract more migrants. Monthly
government child-assistance payments were doubled to US$55, and a one-time payment of US$9,200 was offered to women who had a
second child since 2007.[252]

In 2006, in a bid to compensate for the country's demographic decline, the Russian government started simplifying immigration laws
and launched a state program "for providing assistance to voluntary immigration of ethnic Russians from former Soviet republics".
[253]  In 2009 Russia experienced its highest birth rate since the dissolution of the Soviet Union.[246][254]  In 2012, the birth
rate increased again. Russia recorded 1,896,263 births, the highest number since 1990, and even exceeding annual births during the
period 1967–1969, with a TFR of about 1.7, the highest since 1991. (Source: Vital statistics table below)

In August 2012, as the country saw its first demographic growth since the 1990s, President Putin declared that Russia's population
could reach 146 million by 2025, mainly as a result of immigration.[255]

LARGEST CITIES
Main article: List of cities and towns in Russia by population * v
 * t
 * e

Largest cities or towns in Russia
Rosstat (2010)[256][257]RankNameFederal subjectPop.RankNameFederal subjectPop.
Moscow

Saint Petersburg1MoscowMoscow12,100,00011UfaBashkortostan1,090,000
Novosibirsk

Yekaterinburg2Saint PetersburgSaint Petersburg5,190,00012KrasnoyarskKrasnoyarsk Krai1,050,0003NovosibirskNovosibirsk Oblast
1,560,00013PermPerm Krai1,030,0004YekaterinburgSverdlovsk Oblast1,420,00014VoronezhVoronezh Oblast1,000,4965Nizhny NovgorodNizhny
Novgorod Oblast1,250,00015VolgogradVolgograd Oblast1,000,0006KazanTatarstan1,200,00016SaratovSaratov Oblast840,0007Chelyabinsk
Chelyabinsk Oblast1,180,00017KrasnodarKrasnodar Krai800,0008SamaraSamara Oblast1,170,00018TolyattiSamara Oblast720,0009OmskOmsk
Oblast1,170,00019IzhevskUdmurtia640,00010Rostov-na-DonuRostov Oblast1,100,00020UlyanovskUlyanovsk Oblast615,000ETHNIC GROUPS
Main article: Ethnic groups in RussiaLANGUAGE
Area where Russian language  is spoken as the majority or a minority languageMain articles: Russian language, Languages of Russia,
and List of endangered languages in RussiaRussia's 160 ethnic groups speak some 100 languages.[13]  According to the 2002 Census, 142.6 million people speak Russian,
followed by Tatar  with 5.3 million and Ukrainian  with 1.8 million speakers.[258]  Russian is the only official state language,
but the Constitution gives the individual republics  the right to establish their own state languages in addition to Russian.[259]

Despite its wide distribution, the Russian language is homogeneous throughout the country. Russian is the most geographically
widespread language of Eurasia, as well as the most widely spoken Slavic language.[260]  It belongs to the Indo-European language 
family and is one of the living members of the East Slavic languages, the others being Belarusian  and Ukrainian  (and possibly 
Rusyn). Written examples of Old East Slavic  (Old Russian) are attested from the 10th century onwards.[261]

Russian is the second-most used language on the Internet  after English,[262]  one of two official languages aboard the 
International Space Station[263]  and is one of the six official languages of the UN.[264]

35 languages are officially recognized in Russia in various regions by local governments.

LanguageLanguage familyFederal subject(s)SourceAbazaNorthwest CaucasianKarachay-Cherkessia[265]AdygheNorthwest CaucasianAdygea
[266]AltaiTurkicAltai Republic[267][268]BashkirTurkicBashkortostan;[269]  see also regional lawBuryatMongolicBuryatia[270]Chechen
Northeast CaucasianChechnya[271]CherkessNorthwest CaucasianKarachay-Cherkessia[265]ChuvashTurkicChuvashia[272]Crimean TatarTurkic
Republic of Crimea[273]ErzyaUralicMordovia[274]IngushNortheast CaucasianIngushetia[275]KabardianNorthwest Caucasian
Kabardino-Balkaria[276]KalmykMongolicKalmykia[277]Karachay-BalkarTurkicKabardino-Balkaria
Karachay-Cherkessia[265][276]KhakasTurkicKhakassia[278]KomiUralicKomi Republic[279]Hill MariUralicMari El[280]Meadow MariUralic
Mari El[280]MokshaUralicMordovia[274]NogaiTurkicKarachay-Cherkessia[265]OsseticIndo-EuropeanNorth Ossetia–Alania[281]TatarTurkic
Tatarstan[282]TuvаnTurkicTuva[283]UdmurtUralicUdmurtia[284]UkrainianIndo-EuropeanRepublic of Crimea[273]YakutTurkicSakha Republic
[285]RELIGION
Main article: Religion in Russia
Ivan Eggink's painting represents Vladimir listening to the Orthodox priests, while the papal  envoy stands aside in discontentThe
Baptism of Vladimir, a fresco by Viktor VasnetsovThe ancestors of many of today's Russians practised Orthodox Christianity since
the 10th century. According to the Orthodox Church Tradition, Christianity  was first brought to the territory of modern Belarus,
Russia and Ukraine  by Saint Andrew, the first Apostle  of Jesus Christ.[286]  Following the Primary Chronicle, the definitive 
Christianization  of Kievan Rus'  dates from the year 988 (the year is disputed[287]), when Vladimir the Great  was baptized in 
Chersonesus  and proceeded to baptize his family and people in Kiev. The latter events are traditionally referred to as baptism of
Rus'  (Russian: Крещение Руси, Ukrainian: Хрещення Русі) in Russian and Ukrainian literature.

At the time of the 1917 Revolution, the Russian Orthodox Church  was deeply integrated into the autocratic state, enjoying
official status. This was a significant factor that contributed to the Bolshevik attitude to religion and the steps they took to
control it. Bolsheviks consisted of many people with non-Russian, Communist Russians and influential Jewish backgrounds such as 
Vladimir Lenin, Leon Trotsky, Grigory Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev, Grigori Sokolnikov  who were indifferent towards Christianity and
based on the writings of Jewish philosopher Karl Marx  with Marxism–Leninism  as an ideology went on to form the Communist party.
[288]  Thus the USSR became the first[citation needed]  state to have, as an ideological objective, the elimination of religion
[289]  and its replacement with universal atheism.[290][291]  The communist  regime confiscated religious property, ridiculed
religion, harassed believers, and propagated atheism in schools.[292]  The confiscation of religious assets was often based on
accusations of illegal accumulation of wealth.

The vast majority of people in the Russian empire were, at the time of the revolution, religious believers, whereas the communists
aimed to break the power of all religious institutions and eventually replace religious belief with atheism. "Science" was
counterposed to "religious superstition" in the media and in academic writing. The main religions of pre-revolutionary Russia
persisted throughout the entire Soviet period, but they were only tolerated within certain limits. Generally, this meant that
believers were free to worship in private and in their respective religious buildings (churches, mosques, etc.), but public
displays of religion outside of such designated areas were prohibited. In addition, religious institutions were not allowed to
express their views in any type of mass media, and many religious buildings were demolished or used for other purposes.[citation
needed]

State Atheism in the Soviet Union was known as gosateizm,[289]  and was based on the ideology of Marxism–Leninism. 
Marxist–Leninist Atheism  has consistently advocated the control, suppression, and elimination of religion. Within about a year of
the revolution, the state expropriated  all church property, including the churches themselves, and in the period from 1922 to
1926, 28 Russian Orthodox bishops  and more than 1,200 priests  were killed. Many more were persecuted.[293]

Currently, there is no official census of religion in Russia, and estimates are based on surveys only. In August 2012, ARENA[294] 
estimated that about 46.8% of Russians are Christians (including Orthodox, Catholic, Protestant, and non-denominational), while
25% believed in God but without any religion. However, later that year, the Levada Center  estimated that 76% of Russians are
Christians,[295]  and in June 2013, the Public Opinion Foundation[296]  estimated that 65% of Russians are Christians. These
findings are in line with Pew Research Center's 2011 survey,[297]  which estimated that 73.6% of Russians are Christians, with 
Russian Public Opinion Research Center  (VCIOM)'s 2010 survey (~77% Christian),[298]  and with Ipsos MORI's 2011 survey (69%).
[299]  Orthodox Christianity, Islam, Judaism  and Buddhism  are Russia's traditional religions, and are all legally a part of
Russia's "historical heritage".[300]

Traced back to the Christianization of Kievan Rus'  in the 10th century, Russian Orthodoxy is the dominant religion in the
country; smaller Christian denominations such as Catholics, Armenian Gregorians  and various Protestant churches also exist. The 
Russian Orthodox Church  was the country's state religion prior to the Revolution and remains the largest religious body in the
country. An estimated 95% of the registered Orthodox parishes belong to the Russian Orthodox Church while there are a number of 
smaller Orthodox Churches.[301]  However, the vast majority of Orthodox believers do not attend church on a regular basis. Easter
is the most popular religious holiday in Russia, celebrated by a large segment of the Russian population, including large numbers
of those who are non-religious. More than three-quarters of the Russian population celebrate Easter by making traditional Easter
cakes, coloured eggs and paskha.[302]

Temple of All Religions, Kazan, TatarstanIslam  is the second largest religion in Russia after Russian Orthodoxy.[303]  It is the traditional or predominant religion
amongst some Caucasian ethnicities  (notably the Chechens, the Ingush  and the Circassians), and amongst some Turkic peoples 
(notably the Tatars  and the Bashkirs). Altogether, there are 9,400,000 Muslims in Russia or 6.5% of the total population as of
2012[update]  (the share of Muslims is probably much higher because the survey doesn't include detailed data for the traditionally
Islamic states of Chechnya  and Ingushetia). Notwithstanding, various differences split the Muslim population in different groups.
According to the survey, most of the Muslims (approximately 6,700,000 or 4.6% of the total population) are "unaffiliated" to any 
Islamic schools and branches  or Islamic organisation, this is mainly because it is not essential for Muslims to be affiliated
with any specific sect or organization. Those who are affiliated are mostly Sunni  Muslims, with Shia  and Ahmadiyya  minorities.
[304]  Unaffiliated Muslims constitute significant numbers of over 10% in Kabardino-Balkaria  (49%), Bashkortostan  (38%), 
Karachay-Cherkessia  (34%), Tatarstan  (31%), Yamalia  (13%), Orenburg Oblast  (11%), Adygea  (11%) and Astrakhan Oblast  (11%).
Most of the regions of Siberia  have an unaffiliated Muslim population of 1% to 2%.[294][305]

Buddhism is traditional in three regions of the Russian Federation: Buryatia, Tuva, and Kalmykia. Some residents of the Siberian
and Far Eastern regions, such as Yakutia  and Chukotka, practice shamanist, pantheistic, and pagan  rites, along with the major
religions. Induction into religion takes place primarily along ethnic lines. Slavs  are significantly Orthodox Christian, Turkic 
speakers are predominantly Muslim, and Mongolic peoples  are generally Buddhists.[306]

According to various western purposive reports, the number of non-religious  in Russia is between 16% and 48% of the population.
[307]  The number of atheists has decreased significantly; according to the recent statistic, only seven percent declared
themselves atheists, a decrease of 5% in three years.[308]  In a 2012 poll by Gallup International, 6% of Russian people reported
that they were "convinced atheists which is lowest among European countries"[309]

In cultural and social affairs Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church. Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, head
of the Church, endorsed his election in 2012. Steven Myers reports, "The church, once heavily repressed, had emerged from the
Soviet collapse as one of the most respected institutions....Now Kiril led the faithful directly into an alliance with the state."

[310]  Mark Woods provides specific examples of how the Church under Patriarch Kirill of Moscow  has backed the expansion of
Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine.[311]  More broadly the New York Times  reports in September 2016 how that Church's
policy prescriptions support the Kremlin's appeal to social conservatives:

A fervent foe of homosexuality and any attempt to put individual rights above those of family, community or nation, the Russian
Orthodox Church helps project Russia as the natural ally of all those who pine for a more secure, illiberal world free from the
tradition-crushing rush of globalization, multiculturalism and women’s and gay rights.[312]HEALTH
Main article: Healthcare in Russia
A mobile clinic used to provide health care at remote railway stationsThe Russian Constitution guarantees free, universal health care  for all its citizens.[313]  In practice, however, free health
care is partially restricted because of mandatory registration.[314]  While Russia has more physicians, hospitals, and health care
workers than almost any other country in the world on a per capita basis,[315]  since the dissolution of the Soviet Union the
health of the Russian population has declined considerably as a result of social, economic, and lifestyle changes;[316]  the trend
has been reversed only in the recent years, with average life expectancy having increased 5.2 years for males and 3.1 years for
females between 2006 and 2014.[317]

As of 2014[update], the average life expectancy in Russia was 65.29 years for males and 76.49 years for females.[317]  The biggest
factor contributing to the relatively low life expectancy for males is a high mortality rate among working-age males. Deaths
mostly occur because of preventable causes (e.g., alcohol poisoning, smoking, traffic accidents, violent crime).[246]  As a result
of the large gender difference in life expectancy, and also because of the lasting effect of high casualties in World War II, the 
gender imbalance  remains to this day; there are 0.859 males to every female.[100]

EDUCATION
Main article: Education in RussiaMoscow State UniversityRussia has the most college-level or higher graduates in terms of
percentage of population in the world, at 54%.[318]  Russia has a free education  system, which is guaranteed for all citizens by
the Constitution,[319]  however entry to subsidized higher education is highly competitive.[320]  As a result of great emphasis on
science and technology in education, Russian medical, mathematical, scientific, and aerospace research is generally of a high
order.[321]

Since 1990, the 11-year school education has been introduced. Education in state-owned secondary schools is free. University level
education is free, with exceptions. A substantial share of students is enrolled for full pay (many state institutions started to
open commercial positions in the last years).[322]

In 2004, state spending for education amounted to 3.6% of the GDP, or 13% of the consolidated state budget.[323]  The Government
allocates funding to pay the tuition fees within an established quota or number of students for each state institution. In higher
education institutions, students are paid a small stipend  and provided with free housing if they are from out of town.[324]

The oldest and largest Russian universities  are Moscow State University  and Saint Petersburg State University. In the 2000s, in
order to create higher education and research institutions of comparable scale in Russian regions, the government launched a
program of establishing "federal universities", mostly by merging existing large regional universities and research institutes and
providing them with a special funding. These new institutions include the Southern Federal University, Siberian Federal University
, Kazan Volga Federal University, North-Eastern Federal University, and Far Eastern Federal University.

CULTURE
Main article: Russian cultureFOLK CULTURE AND CUISINE
See also: Russian traditions, Russian jokes, Russian fairy tales, and Russian cuisineThe Merchant's Wife  by Boris Kustodiev,
showcasing the Russian tea cultureThere are over 160 different ethnic groups and indigenous peoples in Russia.[242]  The country's vast cultural diversity spans
ethnic Russians  with their Slavic  Orthodox  traditions, Tatars  and Bashkirs  with their Turkic Muslim culture, Buddhist  
nomadic  Buryats  and Kalmyks, Shamanistic  peoples of the Extreme North  and Siberia, highlanders of the Northern Caucasus, and 
Finno-Ugric peoples  of the Russian North West  and Volga Region.

Handicraft, like Dymkovo toy, khokhloma, gzhel  and palekh miniature  represent an important aspect of Russian folk culture.
Ethnic Russian clothes include kaftan, kosovorotka  and ushanka  for men, sarafan  and kokoshnik  for women, with lapti  and 
valenki  as common shoes. The clothes of Cossacks  from Southern Russia include burka  and papaha, which they share with the
peoples of the Northern Caucasus.

Russian cuisine  widely uses fish, poultry, mushrooms, berries, and honey. Crops of rye, wheat, barley, and millet  provide the
ingredients for various breads, pancakes  and cereals, as well as for kvass, beer and vodka drinks. Black bread  is rather popular
in Russia, compared to the rest of the world. Flavourful soups and stews include shchi, borsch, ukha, solyanka  and okroshka. 
Smetana  (a heavy sour cream) is often added to soups and salads. Pirozhki, blini  and syrniki  are native types of pancakes. 
Chicken Kiev, pelmeni  and shashlyk  are popular meat dishes, the last two being of Tatar and Caucasus origin respectively. Other
meat dishes include stuffed cabbage rolls (golubtsy)  usually filled with meat.[325]  Salads include Olivier salad, vinegret  and 
dressed herring.

Russia's large number of ethnic groups have distinctive traditions regarding folk music. Typical ethnic Russian musical
instruments are gusli, balalaika, zhaleika, and garmoshka. Folk music had a significant influence on Russian classical composers,
and in modern times it is a source of inspiration for a number of popular folk bands, like Melnitsa. Russian folk songs, as well
as patriotic Soviet songs, constitute the bulk of the repertoire of the world-renowned Red Army choir  and other popular
ensembles.

Russians have many traditions, including the washing in banya, a hot steam bath somewhat similar to sauna.[56]  Old Russian
folklore  takes its roots in the pagan Slavic religion. Many Russian fairy tales  and epic bylinas  were adapted for animation
films, or for feature movies by the prominent directors like Aleksandr Ptushko  (Ilya Muromets, Sadko) and Aleksandr Rou  (Morozko
, Vasilisa the Beautiful). Russian poets, including Pyotr Yershov  and Leonid Filatov, made a number of well-known poetical
interpretations of the classical fairy tales, and in some cases, like that of Alexander Pushkin, also created fully original fairy
tale poems of great popularity.

ARCHITECTURE
Main articles: Russian architecture  and List of Russian architects
Stroganov Church in Nizhny Novgorod, a well known piece of Russian architectureSince the Christianization of Kievan Rus'  for several ages Russian architecture was influenced predominantly by the Byzantine
architecture. Apart from fortifications (kremlins), the main stone buildings of ancient Rus' were Orthodox churches  with their
many domes, often gilded or brightly painted.

Aristotle Fioravanti  and other Italian architects brought Renaissance  trends into Russia since the late 15th century, while the
16th century saw the development of unique tent-like churches  culminating in Saint Basil's Cathedral.[326]  By that time the 
onion dome  design was also fully developed.[327]  In the 17th century, the "fiery style" of ornamentation flourished in Moscow
and Yaroslavl, gradually paving the way for the Naryshkin baroque  of the 1690s. After the reforms of Peter the Great  the change
of architectural styles in Russia generally followed that in the Western Europe.

The 18th-century taste for rococo  architecture led to the ornate works of Bartolomeo Rastrelli  and his followers. The reigns of 
Catherine the Great  and her grandson Alexander I  saw the flourishing of Neoclassical architecture, most notably in the capital
city of Saint Petersburg. The second half of the 19th century was dominated by the Neo-Byzantine  and Russian Revival  styles.
Prevalent styles of the 20th century were the Art Nouveau, Constructivism, and the Stalin Empire style.

In 1955, a new Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, condemned the "excesses" of the former academic architecture,[328]  and the late
Soviet era was dominated by plain functionalism in architecture. This helped somewhat to resolve the housing problem, but created
a large quantity of buildings of low architectural quality, much in contrast with the previous bright styles. The situation
improved in the recent two decades. Many temples demolished in Soviet times were rebuilt, and this process continues along with
the restoration of various historical buildings destroyed in World War II. A total of 23,000 Orthodox churches have been rebuilt
between 1991 and 2010, which effectively quadrapled the number of operating churches in Russia.[329]

VISUAL ARTS
Main article: Russian artists
A piece of Russian icon art known as Rublev's TrinityKarl Bryullov  (1799–1852), a key figure in transition from the Russian
neoclassicism to romanticism.Early Russian painting is represented in icons  and vibrant frescos, the two genres inherited from Byzantium. As Moscow rose to
power, Theophanes the Greek, Dionisius  and Andrei Rublev  became vital names associated with a distinctly Russian art.

The Russian Academy of Arts  was created in 1757[330]  and gave Russian artists an international role and status. Ivan Argunov, 
Dmitry Levitzky, Vladimir Borovikovsky  and other 18th century academicians mostly focused on portrait painting. In the early 19th
century, when neoclassicism  and romantism  flourished, mythological and Biblical themes inspired many prominent paintings,
notably by Karl Briullov  and Alexander Ivanov.

In the mid-19th century the Peredvizhniki  (Wanderers) group of artists broke with the Academy and initiated a school of art
liberated from academic restrictions.[331]  These were mostly realist  painters who captured Russian identity in landscapes of
wide rivers, forests, and birch clearings, as well as vigorous genre scenes and robust portraits of their contemporaries. Some
artists focused on depicting dramatic moments in Russian history, while others turned to social criticism, showing the conditions
of the poor and caricaturing authority; critical realism  flourished under the reign of Alexander II. Leading realists include 
Ivan Shishkin, Arkhip Kuindzhi, Ivan Kramskoi, Vasily Polenov, Isaac Levitan, Vasily Surikov, Viktor Vasnetsov, Ilya Repin, and 
Boris Kustodiev.

The turn of the 20th century saw the rise of symbolist  painting, represented by Mikhail Vrubel, Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin, and 
Nicholas
Roerich.

The Russian avant-garde  was a large, influential wave of modernist art  that flourished in Russia from approximately 1890 to
1930. The term covers many separate, but inextricably related art movements that occurred at the time, namely neo-primitivism, 
suprematism, constructivism, rayonism, and Russian Futurism. Notable artists from this era include El Lissitzky, Kazimir Malevich,
 Wassily Kandinsky, and Marc Chagall. Since the 1930s the revolutionary ideas of the avant-garde  clashed with the newly emerged
conservative direction of socialist realism.

Soviet art produced works that were furiously patriotic and anti-fascist  during and after the Great Patriotic War. Multiple war
memorials, marked by a great restrained solemnity, were built throughout the country. Soviet artists often combined innovation
with socialist realism, notably the sculptors Vera Mukhina, Yevgeny Vuchetich  and Ernst Neizvestny.

MUSIC AND DANCE
Main articles: Music of Russia, Russian ballet, Russian opera, Russian rock, Russian pop, and Russian composers
The Snowdance  scene from The Nutcracker  ballet, composed by Pyotr Ilyich TchaikovskyMusic in 19th century Russia was defined by
the tension between classical composer Mikhail Glinka  along with other members of The Mighty Handful, who embraced Russian
national identity and added religious and folk elements to their compositions, and the Russian Musical Society  led by composers 
Anton  and Nikolay Rubinsteins, which was musically conservative. The later tradition of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, one of the
greatest composers of the Romantic era, was continued into the 20th century by Sergei Rachmaninoff.[332]  World-renowned composers
of the 20th century include Alexander Scriabin, Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich  and Alfred Schnittke.

Russian conservatories have turned out generations of famous soloists. Among the best known are violinists Jascha Heifetz, David
Oistrakh, Leonid Kogan, Gidon Kremer, and Maxim Vengerov; cellists Mstislav Rostropovich, Natalia Gutman; pianists Vladimir
Horowitz, Sviatoslav Richter, Emil Gilels, Vladimir Sofronitsky  and Evgeny Kissin; and vocalists Fyodor Shalyapin, Mark Reizen, 
Elena Obraztsova, Tamara Sinyavskaya, Nina Dorliak, Galina Vishnevskaya, Anna Netrebko  and Dmitry Hvorostovsky.[333]

During the early 20th century, Russian ballet dancers Anna Pavlova  and Vaslav Nijinsky  rose to fame, and impresario Sergei
Diaghilev  and his Ballets Russes' travels abroad profoundly influenced the development of dance worldwide.[334]  Soviet ballet
preserved the perfected 19th century traditions,[335]  and the Soviet Union's choreography schools produced many internationally
famous stars, including Galina Ulanova, Maya Plisetskaya, Rudolf Nureyev, and Mikhail Baryshnikov. The Bolshoi Ballet  in Moscow
and the Mariinsky Ballet  in St Petersburg remain famous throughout the world.[336]

Modern Russian rock  music takes its roots both in the Western rock and roll  and heavy metal, and in traditions of the Russian
bards  of the Soviet era, such as Vladimir Vysotsky  and Bulat Okudzhava.[337]  Popular Russian rock groups include Mashina
Vremeni, DDT, Aquarium, Alisa, Kino, Kipelov, Nautilus Pompilius, Aria, Grazhdanskaya Oborona, Splean  and Korol i Shut. Russian
pop  music developed from what was known in the Soviet times as estrada  into full-fledged industry, with some performers gaining
wide international recognition, such as t.A.T.u., Nu Virgos  and Vitas.

LITERATURE AND PHILOSOPHY
Main articles: Russian literature, Russian philosophy, Russian poets, Russian playwrights, Russian novelists, and Russian science
fiction and fantasyLeo Tolstoy, novelist and philosopherIn the 18th century, during the era of Russian Enlightenment, the development of Russian literature  was boosted by the works of 
Mikhail Lomonosov  and Denis Fonvizin. By the early 19th century a modern native tradition had emerged, producing some of the
greatest writers in Russian history. This period, known also as the Golden Age of Russian Poetry, began with Alexander Pushkin,
who is considered the founder of the modern Russian literary language and often described as the "Russian Shakespeare".[338]  It
continued into the 19th century with the poetry of Mikhail Lermontov  and Nikolay Nekrasov, dramas of Alexander Ostrovsky  and 
Anton Chekhov, and the prose of Nikolai Gogol  and Ivan Turgenev. Leo Tolstoy  and Fyodor Dostoyevsky  have been described by
literary critics as the greatest novelists of all time.[339][340]

By the 1880s, the age of the great novelists was over, and short fiction and poetry became the dominant genres. The next several
decades became known as the Silver Age of Russian Poetry, when the previously dominant literary realism  was replaced by symbolism
. Leading authors of this era include such poets as Valery Bryusov, Vyacheslav Ivanov, Alexander Blok, Nikolay Gumilev  and Anna
Akhmatova, and novelists Leonid Andreyev, Ivan Bunin, and Maxim Gorky.

Russian philosophy  blossomed in the 19th century, when it was defined initially by the opposition of Westernizers, advocating
Western political and economical models, and Slavophiles, insisting on developing Russia as a unique civilization. The latter
group includes Nikolai Danilevsky  and Konstantin Leontiev, the founders of eurasianism. In its further development Russian
philosophy was always marked by a deep connection to literature and interest in creativity, society, politics and nationalism; 
Russian cosmism  and religious philosophy were other major areas. Notable philosophers of the late 19th and the early 20th
centuries include Vladimir Solovyev, Sergei Bulgakov, and Vladimir Vernadsky.

Alexander PushkinFollowing the Russian Revolution  of 1917 many prominent writers and philosophers left the country, including Bunin, Vladimir
Nabokov  and Nikolay Berdyayev, while a new generation of talented authors joined together in an effort to create a distinctive 
working-class culture  appropriate for the new Soviet state. In the 1930s censorship over literature was tightened in line with
the policy of socialist realism. In the late 1950s restrictions on literature were eased, and by the 1970s and 1980s, writers were
increasingly ignoring official guidelines. Leading authors of the Soviet era include novelists Yevgeny Zamyatin, Ilf and Petrov, 
Mikhail Bulgakov  and Mikhail Sholokhov, and poets Vladimir Mayakovsky, Yevgeny Yevtushenko, and Andrey Voznesensky.

The Soviet Union was also a major producer of science fiction, written by authors like Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, Kir Bulychov, 
Alexander Belayev  and Ivan Yefremov.[341]  Traditions of Russian science fiction and fantasy  are continued today by numerous
writers.

CINEMA, ANIMATION AND MEDIA
Main articles: Cinema of Russia, Russian animation, Television in Russia, and Media of Russia
Former Russian President Dmitry Medvedev in the Washington  studio of Russia Today TV  with Margarita SimonyanRussian and later Soviet cinema  was a hotbed of invention in the period immediately following 1917, resulting in world-renowned
films such as The Battleship Potemkin  by Sergei Eisenstein.[342]  Eisenstein was a student of filmmaker and theorist Lev Kuleshov
, who developed the Soviet montage theory  of film editing at the world's first film school, the All-Union Institute of
Cinematography. Dziga Vertov, whose kino-glaz  ("film-eye") theory—that the camera, like the human eye, is best used to explore
real life—had a huge impact on the development of documentary film making and cinema realism. The subsequent state policy of
socialist realism somewhat limited creativity; however, many Soviet films in this style were artistically successful, including 
Chapaev, The Cranes Are Flying, and Ballad of a Soldier.[342]

The 1960s and 1970s saw a greater variety of artistic styles in Soviet cinema. Eldar Ryazanov's and Leonid Gaidai's comedies of
that time were immensely popular, with many of the catch phrases still in use today. In 1961–68 Sergey Bondarchuk  directed an 
Oscar-winning film adaptation  of Leo Tolstoy's epic War and Peace, which was the most expensive film  made in the Soviet Union.
[343]  In 1969, Vladimir Motyl's White Sun of the Desert  was released, a very popular film in a genre of ostern; the film is
traditionally watched by cosmonauts  before any trip into space.[344]

Shukhov Tower on the Oka River  served early radio and TV broadcasting.Russian animation  dates back to late Russian Empire  times. During the Soviet era, Soyuzmultfilm  studio was the largest
animation producer. Soviet animators developed a great variety of pioneering techniques and aesthetic styles, with prominent
directors including Ivan Ivanov-Vano, Fyodor Khitruk  and Aleksandr Tatarsky. Many Soviet cartoon heroes such as the Russian-style
 Winnie-the-Pooh, cute little Cheburashka, Wolf and Hare from Nu, Pogodi!, are iconic images in Russia and many surrounding
countries.

The late 1980s and 1990s were a period of crisis in Russian cinema and animation. Although Russian filmmakers became free to
express themselves, state subsidies were drastically reduced, resulting in fewer films produced. The early years of the 21st
century have brought increased viewership and subsequent prosperity to the industry on the back of the economic revival.
Production levels are already higher than in Britain and Germany.[345]  Russia's total box-office revenue in 2007 was
$565 million, up 37% from the previous year.[346]  In 2002 the Russian Ark  became the first feature film ever to be shot in a
single take. The traditions of Soviet animation were developed recently by such directors as Aleksandr Petrov  and studios like 
Melnitsa Animation.

While there were few stations or channels in the Soviet time, in the past two decades many new state and privately owned radio
stations  and TV channels  have appeared. In 2005 a state-run English language Russia Today TV  started broadcasting, and its
Arabic version Rusiya Al-Yaum  was launched in 2007. Censorship and Media freedom in Russia  has always been a main theme of
Russian media.

SPORTS
Main article: Sport in Russia
The Russia national football team  at UEFA Euro 2012Combining the total medals  of the Soviet Union and Russia, the country is second among all nations by number of gold medals both
at the Summer Olympics  and at the Winter Olympics. Soviet and later Russian athletes  have always been in the top three for the
number of gold medals collected at the Summer Olympics. Soviet gymnasts, track-and-field athletes, weight lifters, wrestlers,
boxers, fencers, shooters, cross country skiers, biathletes, speed skaters and figure skaters were consistently among the best in
the world, along with Soviet basketball, handball, volleyball and ice hockey players.[347]  The 1980 Summer Olympics  were held in
Moscow while the 2014 Winter Olympics  were hosted in Sochi.

KHL  finals, the league is considered to be the second-best in the worldAlthough ice hockey  was only introduced during the Soviet era, the national team managed to win gold at almost all the Olympics 
and World Championships  they contested. Russian players Valery Kharlamov, Sergei Makarov, Vyacheslav Fetisov  and Vladislav
Tretiak  hold four of six positions in the IIHF  Team of the Century.[348]  Russia has not won the Olympic ice hockey tournament
since the Unified Team  won gold in 1992. Recently Russia won the 2008, 2009,[349]  2012  and the 2014 IIHF World Championships.
Russia dominated the 2012 tournament, winning all of its ten matches—the first time any team had done so since the Soviet Union in
1989.[350]  The most sports in Russia is volleyball. Russia men's national volleyball team  winner four gold medalist in Olympics 
(1964, 1968, 1980, 2012) and won six gold medalist and two hosted in FIVB Volleyball Men's World Championship  (1949, 1952, 1960,
1962, 1978, 1982). The Kontinental Hockey League  (KHL) was founded in 2008 as a successor to the Russian Superleague. It is seen
as a rival to the National Hockey League  (NHL), is ranked the top hockey league in Europe as of 2009[update],[351]  and the
second-best in the world.[352]  It is an international professional ice hockey league in Eurasia  and consists of 29 teams, of
which 21 are based in Russia and 7 more are located in Latvia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Finland, Slovakia, Croatia  and China.

Bandy, also known as Russian hockey, is another traditionally popular ice sport.[353]  The Soviet Union won all the Bandy World
Championships  for men between 1957–79[354]  and some thereafter too. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia has
continuously been one of the most successful teams, winning many world championships.

Dmitry Medvedev with the Russia men's national ice hockey team
Opening of the 2014 Winter OlympicsAssociation football is one of the most popular sports in modern Russia. The Soviet national
team became the first ever European Champions by winning Euro 1960. Appearing in four FIFA World Cups  from 1958 to 1970, Lev
Yashin  is regarded to be one of the greatest goalkeepers in the history of football, and was chosen on the FIFA World Cup Dream
Team.[355][356]  The Soviet national team reached the final of Euro 1988. In 1956 and 1988, the Soviet Union won gold at the 
Olympic football tournament. Russian clubs CSKA Moscow  and Zenit St Petersburg  won the UEFA Cup  in 2005 and 2008 respectively.
The Russian national football team  reached the semi-finals of Euro 2008, losing only to the eventual champions Spain. Russia will
host the 2018 FIFA World Cup, with 11 host cities located in the European part of the country and in the Ural region.

In 2007, the Russian national basketball team  won the European Basketball Championship. Russian basketball club PBC CSKA Moscow 
is one of the top teams in Europe, winning the Euroleague  in 2006  and 2008.

Larisa Latynina, who currently holds the record for the most gold Olympic medals won by a woman (and held the record for most
Olympic medals won per person from 1964 until 2012 when swimmer Michael Phelps  replaced her record), established the USSR as the
dominant force in gymnastics for many years.[357]  Today, Russia is the leading nation in rhythmic gymnastics  with Yevgeniya
Kanayeva. Russian synchronized swimming  is the best in the world, with almost all gold medals at Olympics and World Championships
having been swept by Russians in recent decades. Figure skating  is another popular sport in Russia, especially pair skating  and 
ice dancing. With the exception of 2010  a Soviet or Russian pair has won gold at every Winter Olympics since 1964.

Since the end of the Soviet era, tennis has grown in popularity and Russia has produced a number of famous players, including 
Maria Sharapova, the world's highest paid female athlete.[358]  In martial arts, Russia produced the sport Sambo  and renowned
fighters, like Fedor Emelianenko. Chess  is a widely popular pastime in Russia; from 1927, Russian grandmasters have held the 
world chess championship  almost continuously.[359]

The 2014 Winter Olympics  were held in Sochi in the south of Russia. Russia won the largest number of medals among the
participating nations with 13 gold, 11 silver, and 9 bronze medals for a total of 33 medals. Commentators evaluated the Games as
having been an overall success.[360][361]

Formula One is also becoming increasingly popular in Russia. In 2010 Vitaly Petrov  of Vyborg  became the first Russian to drive
in Formula One, and was soon followed by a second - Daniil Kvyat, from Ufa  - in 2014. There had only been two Russian Grands Prix
(in 1913 and 1914), but the Russian Grand Prix  returned as part of the Formula One  season in 2014, as part of a six-year deal.
[362]

NATIONAL HOLIDAYS AND SYMBOLS
Main articles: Public holidays in Russia  and Cultural icons of RussiaScarlet Sails  celebration on the Neva  river in Saint
PetersburgThere are seven public holidays in Russia,[363]  except those always celebrated on Sunday. Russian New Year traditions resemble
those of the Western Christmas, with New Year Trees  and gifts, and Ded Moroz  (Father Frost) playing the same role as Santa Claus
. Orthodox Christmas  falls on January 7, because the Russian Orthodox Church  still follows the Julian calendar, and all Orthodox
holidays are 13 days after Western ones. Two other major Christian holidays are Easter and Trinity Sunday. Kurban Bayram  and 
Uraza Bayram  are celebrated by Russian Muslims.

Further Russian public holidays include Defender of the Fatherland Day  (February 23), which honors Russian men, especially those
serving in the army; International Women's Day  (March 8), which combines the traditions of Mother's Day  and Valentine's Day; 
Spring and Labor Day  (1 May); Victory Day; Russia Day  (June 12); and Unity Day  (November 4), commemorating the popular uprising
which expelled the Polish occupation force from Moscow in 1612.

Victory Day  is the second most popular holiday in Russia; it commemorates the victory over Nazism  in the Great Patriotic War. A
huge military parade, hosted by the President of Russia, is annually organised in Moscow on Red Square. Similar parades take place
in all major Russian cities and cities with the status Hero city  or City of Military Glory.

Popular non-public holidays include Old New Year  (the New Year according to the Julian Calendar on January 14), Tatiana Day 
(students holiday on January 25), Maslenitsa  (a pre-Christian spring holiday a week before the Great Lent), Cosmonautics Day  (in
tribute to the first human trip into space), Ivan Kupala Day  (another pre-Christian holiday on July 7) and Peter and Fevronia Day 
 (which takes place on July 8 and is the Russian analogue of Valentine's Day, focusing, however, on family love and fidelity).

Matryoshka doll  taken apartState symbols of Russia include the Byzantine  double-headed eagle, combined with St. George of Moscow  in the Russian coat of
arms. The Russian flag  dates from the late Tsardom of Russia  period and has been widely used since the time of the Russian
Empire. The Russian anthem  shares its music with the Soviet Anthem, though not the lyrics. The imperial motto  God is with us 
and the Soviet motto Proletarians of all countries, unite!  are now obsolete and no new motto has replaced them. The hammer and
sickle  and the full Soviet coat of arms  are still widely seen in Russian cities as a part of old architectural decorations. The
Soviet Red Stars  are also encountered, often on military equipment and war memorials. The Red Banner  continues to be honored,
especially the Banner of Victory  of 1945.

The Matryoshka doll  is a recognizable symbol of Russia, and the towers of Moscow Kremlin  and Saint Basil's Cathedral  in Moscow
are Russia's main architectural icons. Cheburashka  is a mascot of the Russian national Olympic team. St. Mary, St. Nicholas, St.
Andrew, St. George, St. Alexander Nevsky, St. Sergius of Radonezh  and St. Seraphim of Sarov  are Russia's patron saints. 
Chamomile  is the national flower, while birch  is the national tree. The Russian bear  is an animal symbol and a national
personification  of Russia, though this image has a Western origin and Russians themselves have accepted it only fairly recently.
The native Russian national personification is Mother Russia.

TOURISM
Main article: Tourism in RussiaGrand Cascade  in Peterhof, a popular tourist destination in Saint PetersburgTourism in Russia has
seen rapid growth since the late Soviet period, first domestic tourism and then international tourism, fueled by the rich cultural
heritage and great natural variety of the country. Major tourist routes in Russia include a journey around the Golden Ring  of
ancient cities, cruises on the big rivers like the Volga, and long journeys on the famous Trans-Siberian Railway. In 2013, Russia
was visited by 28.4 million tourists; it is the ninth most visited country in the world and the seventh most visited in Europe.
[364]  The number of Western visitors dropped in 2014.[365]

The Motherland Calls  in Volgograd  is the tallest statue of a woman in the world (not including pedestals)The most visited
destinations in Russia are Moscow and Saint Petersburg, the current and former capitals of the country. Recognized as World Cities
, they feature such world-renowned museums as the Tretyakov Gallery  and the Hermitage, famous theaters like Bolshoi  and 
Mariinsky, ornate churches like Saint Basil's Cathedral, Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, Saint Isaac's Cathedral  and Church of
the Savior on Blood, impressive fortifications like the Kremlin  and Peter and Paul Fortress, beautiful squares and streets like 
Red Square, Palace Square, Tverskaya Street  and Nevsky Prospect. Rich palaces and parks are found in the former imperial
residences in suburbs of Moscow (Kolomenskoye, Tsaritsyno) and St Petersburg (Peterhof, Strelna, Oranienbaum, Gatchina, Pavlovsk 
and Tsarskoye Selo). Moscow displays Soviet architecture  at its best, along with modern skyscrapers, while St Petersburg,
nicknamed Venice of the North, boasts of its classical architecture, many rivers, channels and bridges.

Kazan, the capital of Tatarstan, shows a mix of Christian Russian and Muslim Tatar cultures. The city has registered a brand The
Third Capital of Russia, though a number of other major cities compete for this status, including Novosibirsk, Yekaterinburg  and 
Nizhny Novgorod.

The warm subtropical Black Sea coast of Russia is the site for a number of popular sea resorts, like Sochi, the follow-up host of
the 2014 Winter Olympics. The mountains of the Northern Caucasus  contain popular ski resorts such as Dombay. The most famous
natural destination in Russia is Lake Baikal, the Blue Eye of Siberia. This unique lake, the oldest and deepest in the world, has
crystal-clear waters and is surrounded by taiga-covered mountains. Other popular natural destinations include Kamchatka  with its
volcanoes and geysers, Karelia  with its lakes and granite  rocks, the snowy Altai Mountains, and the wild steppes of Tyva.

SEE ALSO
 * Russia portal
 * Europe portal

 * Book: Russia

 * Outline of Russia
 * Index of Soviet Union-related articles

REFERENCES
 1.   ^ a  b  c  d  "ВПН-2010". perepis-2010.ru. Archived from the original  on January 18, 2012.
 2.   ^  Wikisource:Constitution of Russia
 3.   ^  Указ Президента РФ "О праздновании 1150-летия зарождения российской государственности" [Presidential Decree "On
      celebrating
      the 1150th anniversary of Russian statehood"]. www.1150russia.ru  (in Russian). Комитет культуры Новгородской области 
      (Novgorod Region Culture Committee). March 3, 2011. Archived from the original  on July 14, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 
      2016.
 4.   ^  Matt Rosenberg. "Biggest Countries The Twenty Largest Countries in Area in the World". About.com. Retrieved October 20, 
      2016.
 5.   ^  "The Russian federation: general characteristics". Federal State Statistics Service. Archived from the original  on July
      28, 2011. Retrieved April 5,  2008.
 6.   ^ a  b  ОЦЕНКА ЧИСЛЕННОСТИ НАСЕЛЕНИЯ на 1 января 2016 года и в среднем за 2015 год [Population estimates as of January 1,
      2016 and
      the average for 2015]  (XLS). Федеральная служба государственной статистики  (Federal State Statistics Service)  (in
      Russian). Retrieved October 20,  2016.
 7.   ^ a  b  When including the Republic of Crimea  and Sevastopol, the total population of Russia rises to 146,519,759.[6]
 8.   ^  "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects: Russia". IMF. April 2016.
 9.   ^  "Income Gini coefficient". Human Development Reports (Source: World Bank 2013). UNDP. Retrieved August 26,  2015.
 10.  ^  "2015 Human Development Report"  (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2015. Retrieved December 14,  2015.
 11.  ^  Taylor, Adam (March 22, 2014). "Crimea has joined the ranks of the world's 'gray areas.' Here are the others on that
      list.". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 27,  2014.
 12.  ^  "The names Russian Federation and Russia shall be equal". "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 1).
      Retrieved June 25,  2009.
 13.  ^ a  b  "Russia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved January 31,  2008.
 14.  ^  crimea not included
 15.  ^  "Территория и население Российской Федерации".
 16.  ^  "Russia".
 17.  ^  "Рекорды и антирекорды России".
 18.  ^  Official estimate демография [Demography]  Check |url=  value (help). Федеральная служба государственной статистики 
      (Federal State Statistics Service)  (in Russian). Retrieved October 20,  2016.
 19.  ^  "Russia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved January 31,  2008.
 20.  ^ a  b  c  Excerpted from Glenn E. Curtis (ed.) (1998). "Russia: A Country Study: Kievan Rus' and Mongol Periods".
      Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress. Retrieved July 20,  2007.
 21.  ^  Chaliand, Gérard (1967). Introduction. The Mongol Empire: Its Rise and Legacy. By Prawdin, Michael. Transaction
      Publishers. pp. 512–550. ISBN141282897X.
 22.  ^  Rein Taagepera  (1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia". International
      Studies
      Quarterly. 41  (3): 475–504. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053.
 23.  ^  Peter Turchin; Thomas D. Hall; Jonathan M. Adams (2006). "East-West Orientation of Historical Empires"  (PDF). Journal of
      World-Systems Research, Vol. 12 (no. 2). pp. 219–229. Archived from the original  (PDF)  on February 22, 2007.
 24.  ^  Jonathan R. Adelman; Cristann Lea Gibson (July 1, 1989). Contemporary Soviet Military Affairs: The Legacy of World War II
      . Unwin Hyman. p. 4. ISBN978-0-04-445031-3. Retrieved June 15,  2012.
 25.  ^  Weinberg, G. L. (1995). A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II. Cambridge University Press. p. 264. ISBN
      0-521-55879-4.
 26.  ^  Rozhnov, Konstantin, "Who won World War II?". BBC.
 27.  ^  GDP – Million 1990. CIA Factbook. 1991. Retrieved November 30,  2015.
 28.  ^  Scott and Scott (1979) p. 305
 29.  ^  "30 October 1961 - The Tsar Bomba: CTBTO Preparatory Commission".
 30.  ^ a  b  "Country Profile: Russia". Foreign & Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom. Archived from the original  on
      October 16, 2009. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 31.  ^  "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". IMF. Retrieved April 27,  2015.
 32.  ^  "Commission of the Russian Federation for UNESCO: Panorama of Russia". Unesco.ru. Retrieved October 29,  2010.
 33.  ^ a  b  "International Energy Agency – Oil Market Report"  (PDF). January 18, 2012. Archived from the original  (PDF)  on
      May 18, 2012. Retrieved February 20,  2012.
 34.  ^ a  b  "Country Comparison :: Natural gas – production", CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
 35.  ^ a  b  "Status of Nuclear Powers and Their Nuclear Capabilities". Federation of American Scientists. March 2008. Retrieved 
      March 19,  2014.
 36.  ^  "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Retrieved November 2,  2011.
 37.  ^  "Rus – definition of Rus by the Free Online Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia". Thefreedictionary.com. Retrieved 
      November 2,  2011.
 38.  ^  Milner-Gulland, R. R. (1997). The Russians: The People of Europe. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 1–4. ISBN0-631-21849-1.
 39.  ^  "Definition of Russian". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved September 21,  2016.
 40.  ^  Belinskij A, Härke, H (1999). "The 'Princess' of Ipatovo". Archeology. 52  (2). Archived from the original  on June 10,
      2008. Retrieved December 26,  2007.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
 41.  ^  Jacobson, E. (1995). The Art of the Scythians: The Interpenetration of Cultures at the Edge of the Hellenic World. Brill.
      p. 38. ISBN90-04-09856-9.
 42.  ^  Tsetskhladze, G. R. (1998). The Greek Colonisation of the Black Sea Area: Historical Interpretation of Archaeology. F.
      Steiner. p. 48. ISBN3-515-07302-7.
 43.  ^  Turchin, P. (2003). Historical Dynamics: Why States Rise and Fall. Princeton University Press. pp. 185–186. ISBN
      0-691-11669-5.
 44.  ^  Christian, D. (1998). A History of Russia, Central Asia and Mongolia. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 286–288. ISBN
      0-631-20814-3.
 45.  ^  For a discussion of the origins of Slavs, see Barford, P. M. (2001). The Early Slavs. Cornell University Press.
      pp. 15–16. ISBN0-8014-3977-9.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
 46.  ^  Christian, D. (1998). A History of Russia, Central Asia and Mongolia. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 6–7.
 47.  ^  Obolensky, D. (1994). Byzantium and the Slavs. St Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 42. ISBN0-88141-008-X.
 48.  ^  Thompson, J.W.; Johnson, E.N. (1937). An Introduction to Medieval Europe, 300–1500. W. W. Norton & Co. p. 268. ISBN
      0-415-34699-1.
 49.  ^  "Ukraine: Security Assistance". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 50.  ^  Klyuchevsky, V. (1987). The course of the Russian history. 1. Myslʹ. ISBN5-244-00072-1.
 51.  ^  Hamm, M.F. (1995). Kiev: A Portrait, 1800–1917. Princeton University Press. ISBN0-691-02585-1.
 52.  ^  "The Destruction of Kiev". Tspace.library.utoronto.ca. Retrieved January 19,  2011.[dead link]
 53.  ^  "History of Russia from Early Slavs history and Kievan Rus to Romanovs dynasty". Parallelsixty.com. Retrieved April 27, 
      2010.
 54.  ^  Рыбаков, Б. А. (1948). Ремесло Древней Руси. pp. 525–533, 780–781.
 55.  ^ a  b  "Black Death". Joseph Patrick Byrne (2004). p. 62. ISBN 0-313-32492-1
 56.  ^ a  b  "The history of banya and sauna"  (in Russian).[dead link]
 57.  ^  May, T. "Khanate of the Golden Horde". Archived from the original  on June 7, 2008. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 58.  ^  Frank D. McConnell. Storytelling and Mythmaking: Images from Film and Literature.  Oxford University Press, 1979. ISBN
      0-19-502572-5; p. 78: "But Ivan IV, Ivan the Terrible, or as the Russian has it, Ivan Groznyi, "Ivan the Magnificent" or
      "Ivan the Awesome", is precisely a man who has become a legend"
 59.  ^  Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 6. AST. pp. 562–604. ISBN5-17-002142-9.
 60.  ^  Skrynnikov, R. (1981). Ivan the Terrible. Academic Intl Pr. p. 219. ISBN0-87569-039-4.
 61.  ^  Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 6. AST. pp. 751–908. ISBN5-17-002142-9.
 62.  ^  Eizo Matsuki. "The Crimean Tatars and their Russian-Captive Slaves."  (PDF). Mediterranean Studies Group at Hitotsubashi
      University. Archived from the original  (PDF)  on May 1, 2011. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 63.  ^  Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 6. AST. pp. 751–809. ISBN5-17-002142-9.
 64.  ^  Brian Glyn Williams  (2013). "The Sultan's Raiders: The Military Role of the Crimean Tatars in the Ottoman Empire"  (PDF)
      . The Jamestown Foundation. p. 27.
 65.  ^  Borisenkov, E., Pasetski, V. The thousand-year annals of the extreme meteorological phenomena. p. 190. ISBN5-244-00212-0. 
       CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
 66.  ^  Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 7. AST. pp. 461–568. ISBN5-17-002142-9.
 67.  ^  Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 9, ch.1. AST. ISBN5-17-002142-9. Retrieved December 27, 
      2007.
 68.  ^  Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 15, ch.1. AST.
 69.  ^  Timothy C. Dowling Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond  pp 728-730 ABC-CLIO,
      December 2, 2014 ISBN 1598849484
 70.  ^  John F. Baddeley, "The Russian Conquest of the Caucasus", Longman, Green and Co., London: 1908. ISBN 978-0700706341  p.
      90
 71.  ^  "Ruling the Empire". Library of Congress. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 72.  ^  Geoffrey A. Hosking (2001). "Russia and the Russians: a history". Harvard University Press. p. 9. ISBN 0-674-00473-6
 73.  ^  N. M. Dronin, E. G. Bellinger (2005). Climate dependence and food problems in Russia, 1900–1990: The interaction of
      climate and agricultural policy and their effect on food problems. Central European University Press. p. 38. ISBN
      963-7326-10-3
 74.  ^  Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. James E. Hassell (1991), p. 3. ISBN 0-87169-817-X
 75.  ^  Famine in Russia: the hidden horrors of 1921, International Committee of the Red Cross
 76.  ^  Abbott Gleason (2009). A Companion to Russian History. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 373. ISBN 1-4051-3560-3
 77.  ^ a  b  Getty, Rittersporn, Zemskov. "Victims of the Soviet Penal System in the Pre-War Years: A First Approach on the Basis
      of Archival Evidence". The American Historical Review, Vol. 98, No. 4 (Oct. 1993), pp. 1017–49.
 78.  ^  R. W. Davies, S. G. Wheatcroft  (2004). The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931–33, p. 401.
 79.  ^  "World War II". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved March 9,  2008.
 80.  ^  "The Allies' first decisive successes: Stalingrad and the German retreat, summer 1942 – February 1943". Encyclopædia
      Britannica. Retrieved March 12,  2008.
 81.  ^  The Legacy of the Siege of Leningrad, 1941–1995. Cambridge University Press.
 82.  ^  Brinkley, Douglas. The New York Times Living History: World War II, 1942-1945: The Allied Counteroffensive. Macmillan,
      2004.
 83.  ^  Urquhart, Brian. Looking for the Sheriff. New York Review of Books, July 16, 1998.
 84.  ^  Erlikman, V. (2004). Poteri narodonaseleniia v XX veke : spravochnik. Moskva: Russkai︠a︡ panorama. ISBN5-93165-107-1.
      Note: Estimates for Soviet World War II casualties vary between sources.
 85.  ^  Geoffrey A. Hosking (2006). Rulers and victims: the Russians in the Soviet Union. Harvard University Press. p. 242. ISBN
      0-674-02178-9
 86.  ^  "Reconstruction and Cold War". Library of Congress. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 87.  ^  Foreign trade  from A Country Study: Soviet Union (Former). Library of Congress Country Studies  project.
 88.  ^  "Great Escapes from the Gulag". TIME. June 5, 1978. Retrieved August 1,  2008.
 89.  ^  "1990 CIA World Factbook". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved March 9,  2008.
 90.  ^  "Russia Unforeseen Results of Reform". The Library of Congress Country Studies; CIA World Factbook. Retrieved March 10, 
      2008.
 91.  ^ a  b  c  "Russian Federation"  (PDF). Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Retrieved February
      24,  2008.
 92.  ^  Sciolino, E. (December 21, 1993). "U.S. is abandoning 'shock therapy' for the Russians". New York Times. Retrieved 
      January 20,  2008.
 93.  ^  "Russia: Economic Conditions in Mid-1996". Library of Congress. Retrieved March 4,  2011.
 94.  ^  "Russia: Clawing Its Way Back to Life (int'l edition)". BusinessWeek. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 95.  ^  Walter C. Clemens (2001). The Baltic Transformed: Complexity Theory and European Security. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 106. 
      ISBN0-8476-9859-9.
 96.  ^ a  b  Branko Milanovic (1998). Income, Inequality, and Poverty During the Transformation from Planned to Market Economy.
      The World Bank. pp. 186–189.
 97.  ^  Jason Bush (October 19, 2006). "What's Behind Russia's Crime Wave?". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original  on
      December 20, 2008.
 98.  ^  "Russia pays off USSR's entire debt, sets to become crediting country". Pravda.ru. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 99.  ^  A. Aslund. "Russia's Capitalist Revolution"  (PDF). Retrieved March 28,  2008.
 100. ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  The World Factbook. "CIA". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved December 26,  2007.
 101. ^  "Page Not Found"  (PDF).
 102. ^  Treisman, D. "Is Russia's Experiment with Democracy Over?". UCLA International Institute. Archived from the original  on
      November 11, 2004. Retrieved December 31,  2007.
 103. ^  Stone, N (December 4, 2007). "No wonder they like Putin". The Times. UK. Retrieved December 31,  2007.
 104. ^  Reuters (March 3, 2014). "Ousted Ukrainian President Asked For Russian Troops, Envoy Says". NBC News. Retrieved March 21, 
       2014.
 105. ^  "Putin to deploy Russian troops in Ukraine". BBC News. March 1, 2014. Retrieved March 1,  2014.
 106. ^  Radyuhin, Vladimir (March 1, 2014). "Russian Parliament approves use of army in Ukraine". The Hindu. Chennai, India.
 107. ^  Walker, Shaun (March 4, 2014). "Russian takeover of Crimea will not descend into war, says Vladimir Putin". The Guardian.
      Retrieved March 4,  2014.
 108. ^  Yoon, Sangwon; Krasnolutska, Daryna; Choursina, Kateryna (March 4, 2014). "Russia Stays in Ukraine as Putin Channels
      Yanukovych Request". Bloomberg News. Retrieved March 5,  2014.
 109. ^  "Ukraine crisis: Crimea parliament asks to join Russia". BBC News. March 6, 2014. Retrieved April 27,  2015.
 110. ^  "OSCE". Retrieved April 27,  2015.
 111. ^  "Report on the human rights situation in Ukraine". Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. April
      15, 2014.
 112. ^  Jacobs, Harrison (April 11, 2014). "The UN's Scathing Crimea Report Suggests Russia May Have Rigged Secession Vote". 
      Business Insider.
 113. ^  "Jobbik MEP Béla Kovács: The Crimean referendum is perfectly legitimate". hungarianambiance.com. March 16, 2014.
      Retrieved April 27,  2015.
 114. ^  March 16, 2014, David Herszenhornmarch, The New York Times, "Crimea Votes to Secede From Ukraine as Russian Troops Keep
      Watch."
 115. ^  "Backing Ukraine's territorial integrity, UN Assembly declares Crimea referendum invalid"  (PDF). UN Daily News. UN News
      Centre. March 27, 2014. Retrieved October 20,  2016.
 116. ^  "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 80, §1). Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 117. ^  "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 81, §3). Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 118. ^  "Democracy at a standstill"  (PDF). World Justice Project. 2013. p. 7. Retrieved August 9,  2014.
 119. ^  "World Justice Project Rule of Law Index 2014".
 120. ^  Kosachev. K. "Russian Foreign Policy Vertical". Russia in Global Affairs. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 121. ^  Venezuela's President Hugo Chavez recognizes independence of breakaway Georgia republics  by Megan K. Stack. September 9,
      2009
 122. ^  Netanyahu declares Russia as superpower  Russia Today News February 15, 2010
 123. ^  Superpower Reborn  by Ronald Steel. New York Times, August 24, 2008
 124. ^  "Russia is a Superpower CNN, US Senators telling the truth". CNN News. August 30, 2008.
 125. ^  Rosefielde, Steven (2005). Russia in the 21st Century The Prodigal Superpower. Cambridge University Press. ISBN
      0-521-83678-6.
 126. ^  Kyle Atwell (August 25, 2008). "Is Russia a Superpower? Cold War II? Atlantic Review". http://atlanticreview.org.
      Atlantic Review. Retrieved October 20,  2016.  External link in |website=  (help)
 127. ^  "What's Looming in Ukraine Is more Threatening than Georgia". http://www.spiegel.de. Der Spiegel. October 16, 2008.
      Retrieved October 20,  2016. Nikonov: Russia is not a superpower and won't be one for the foreseeable future. But Russia is
      a great power. It was one, it is one and it will continue to be one.  External link in |website=  (help)
 128. ^  The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation  at Globalsecurity.org April 27, 2005
 129. ^  "Russian Federation – Member state". Council of Europe. Retrieved April 28,  2015.
 130. ^  "Legal framework - The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement". Delegation of the European Union to Russia. February 13,
      2009. Retrieved April 27,  2015.
 131. ^  "Political framework - Europe and Russia: Building a Strategic Partnership". Delegation of the European Union to Russia.
      February 13, 2009. Retrieved April 27,  2015.
 132. ^  "Interview of official Ambassador of Russian Foreign Ministry on relations with the EU"  (in Russian). RIA Novosti.
      Retrieved June 30,  2008.
 133. ^  "NATO-Russia relations". NATO. Archived from the original  on April 11, 2007. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 134. ^  Kotoky, Anurag (November 16, 2013). "Indian navy gets Russian carrier as it seeks to bolster military". Ruetes.
 135. ^  Page, Jeremy (September 26, 2010). "Russian Oil Route Will Open to China". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September
      28,  2010.
 136. ^  "Russia in milestone oil pipeline supply to China". Reuters. January 1, 2011. Retrieved March 21,  2011.
 137. ^  "Amnesty International report on Russia". Amnesty International. Archived from the original  on July 13, 2010. Retrieved 
      July 11,  2010.
 138. ^  Human Rights Watch on Russia and Chechnya HTW.org
 139. ^  "Annual report Russia". Freedom House. May 10, 2004. Retrieved April 27,  2010.
 140. ^  "In Russian: МИД России назвал доклад Freedom House "дубиной" в руках Вашингтона". Newsru.com. Retrieved April 27,  2010.
 141. ^  "Overview of the major Asian Powers"  (PDF). International Institute for Strategic Studies: 31. Retrieved January 27, 
      2008.
 142. ^  Russia pilots proud of flights to foreign shores  by David Nowak. The Associated Press, September 15, 2008
 143. ^  "US drives world military spending to record high". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original  on
      June 13, 2006. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 144. ^  "Russia arms exports could exceed $7 bln in 2007 – Ivanov". RIA Novosti. Retrieved January 27,  2008.
 145. ^  Wezeman, Pieter D.; Siemon T. Wezeman (March 2015). "Trends in International Arms Transfer, 2014"  (PDF). Stockholm
      International Peace Research Institute. Retrieved August 4,  2016.
 146. ^  Kazak, Sergey. "Russia to Up Nuclear Weapons Spending 50% by 2016". RIA Novosti. Retrieved March 1,  2014.
 147. ^  "SIPRI Military Expenditure Database". Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. Retrieved March 1,  2014.
 148. ^  Toohey, Nathan. "Russia's defense spending grows to third largest in the world". Moscow Times. Retrieved March 1,  2014.
 149. ^  Earle, Jonathan (June 14, 2012). "Report: Russia Less Peaceful Than North Korea". The Moscow Times. Retrieved June 23, 
      2012.
 150. ^  "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". pravo.gov.ru  (in Russian). April 11, 2014. pp. 19, 21.
 151. ^  "Treaty Between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Crimea on Ascension to the Russian Federation of the Republic
      of Crimea and on Establishment of New Subjects Within the Russian Federation"  (in Russian). Kremlin.ru. March 18, 2014.
      Retrieved April 10,  2014.
 152. ^  "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 95, §2). Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 153. ^ a  b  Direct elections of heads of republics (and other federal subjects) are mandated by Article 18 of the Federal Law
      of
      06.10.1999 No. 184-FZ  as amended by Federal Law of 2.05.2012 No. 40-FZ
 154. ^  Designation of republican heads as presidents is forbidden by Federal Law of 28.12.2010 No. 406-FZ, but transitional
      period lasts until January 1, 2015
 155. ^  Russian Classification of Economic Regions  (OK 024–95) of January 1, 1997 as amended by the Amendments #1/1998 through
      #5/2001. (Section I. Federal Districts)
 156. ^  "General Information". Russian 6Embassy. Retrieved February 14,  2016.
 157. ^  Regions of Russia. Social and economic indicators 2015  Russian Federal State Statistics Service
 158. ^  The World Network of Biosphere Reserves—UNESCO. "Russian Federation". Retrieved December 26,  2007.
 159. ^  Alton S Donnelly, The Russian Conquest of Bashkiria, 1968, pages 23 and 127; Lincoln, W. Bruce. The Conquest of a
      Continent: Siberia and the Russians. New York: Random House, 1994, p. 30
 160. ^  "Oil prices drive the cost of food". RIA Novosti. Retrieved February 22,  2008.
 161. ^ a  b  Library of Congress. "Topography and drainage". Retrieved December 26,  2007.
 162. ^  "Lake Baikal—A Touchstone for Global Change and Rift Studies". United States Geological Survey. Retrieved December 26, 
      2007.
 163. ^  "Angara River". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Retrieved December 26,  2007.
 164. ^ a  b  "Climate". Library of Congress. Retrieved December 26,  2007.
 165. ^  "Pogoda.ru.net"  (in Russian). Retrieved September 8,  2010.
 166. ^  Drozdov, V. A.; Glezer, O. B.; Nefedova, T. G.; Shabdurasulov, I. V. (1992). "Ecological and Geographical Characteristics
      of the Coastal Zone of the Black Sea". GeoJournal. 27  (2): 169. doi:10.1007/BF00717701.
 167. ^ a  b  "FAO. 2010. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010. Main Report. FAO Forestry Working Paper 163, Rome, Italy"  
      (PDF). Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 168. ^  Walsh, N. P. (September 19, 2003). "It's Europe's lungs and home to many rare species. But to Russia it's £100bn of wood"
      . London: Guardian (UK). Retrieved December 26,  2007.
 169. ^  I. A. Merzliakova (November 1, 1997). "List of animals of the Red Data Book of Russian Federation". UNEP/GRID–Arendal.
      Retrieved April 27,  2010.
 170. ^  World Bank. "World Development Indicators". World Bank. Retrieved August 6,  2011.
 171. ^  "Russians weigh an enigma with Putin's protégé". MSNBC. Retrieved May 9,  2008.
 172. ^  Mark Adomanis (October 9, 2012). "What is the Russian Middle Class? Probably Not What You Think". Forbes. Retrieved April
      27,  2015.
 173. ^  "Average salary in Russia reached 30,000 rubles". Rossiyskaya Gazeta.
 174. ^  "Average salary in Russia from Russia's Federal Statistics Service (May 2013)". Gks.ru. Retrieved August 14,  2013.
 175. ^  "Lessons from the Russia's 2001 Flat Tax Reform". Voxeu.org. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 176. ^  "Russia Is Getting Wealthier". The Moscow Times. October 21, 2010.
 177. ^  "Russia's unemployment rate down 10% in 2007 – report". RIA Novosti. Retrieved May 9,  2008.
 178. ^  "Russia: How Long Can The Fun Last?". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original  on January 4, 2007. Retrieved December
      27,  2007.
 179. ^  "A Rising Middle Class Will Fuel Growth in Russia". nielsen.com. March 27, 2013. Retrieved April 27,  2015.
 180. ^  Meyer, Henry; Anna; rianova (April 23, 2015). "Putin's Miracle Dissolves as Russian Middle Class Faces Crunch"  – via
      www.bloomberg.com.
 181. ^  Sysoyeva, Marina (August 27, 2012). "Russia Raw-Sugar Imports Dropped 82% This Year Through Aug. 22". Bloomberg.com.
      Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 182. ^  "Russia fixed asset investment to reach $370 bln by 2010–Kudrin". RIA Novosti. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 183. ^  "International Reserves of the Russian Federation in 2008". The Central Bank of the Russian Federation. Retrieved July
      30,  2008.
 184. ^ a  b  "Kudrin and Fischer honoured by Euromoney and IMF/World Bank meetings in Washington". Euromoney. Retrieved March 4, 
      2011.
 185. ^  "Russia's foreign debt down 31.3% in Q3—finance ministry". RIA Novosti. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 186. ^  Debt – external, CIA World Factbook. Retrieved May 22, 2010.
 187. ^  Tavernise, S. (March 23, 2002). "Russia Imposes Flat Tax on Income, and Its Coffers Swell". The New York Times. Retrieved
       December 27,  2007.
 188. ^  "Global personal taxation comparison survey–market rankings". Mercer (consulting firms). Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 189. ^  "Russia: How Long Can The Fun Last?". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original  on December 13, 2006. Retrieved December
      27,  2007.
 190. ^  Finnegan, Leah (July 22, 2010). "Countries with the MOST College Graduates (PHOTOS)". Huffington Post. Retrieved December
      7,  2011.
 191. ^  GRP by federal subjects of Russia, 1998–2007  (Russian)
 192. ^  "Inequality and the Putin Economy: Inside the Numbers". pbs.org. Frontline. Retrieved January 14,  2015.
 193. ^  "Global Wealth Report 2014". Credit Suisse. Research Institute. Retrieved January 14,  2015.
 194. ^  "Russia to invest $1 trillion in infrastructure by 2020 – ministry". RIA Novosti. Retrieved July 31,  2008.
 195. ^  "Russia finally joins WTO". Financial Times. December 16, 2011. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 196. ^  "Doing business in Russia". Norwegian-Russian Chamber of Commerce. June 10, 2012. Archived from the original  on
      September 18, 2007. Retrieved June 10,  2012.
 197. ^  "Russia Ready to Float Ruble Next Year Regardless of Rate". CRIA. 2009.
 198. ^  Putin's Kleptocracy: Who Owns Russia?, published September 30, 2014, by Karen Dawisha.
 199. ^  Ostroukh, Andrey (January 17, 2014). "Russia Ready to Float Ruble Next Year Regardless of Rate". Wall Street Journal.
 200. ^  Razumovskaya, Olga (July 25, 2014). "Russian Central Bank Raises Key Interest Rate to 8% From 7.5%". Wall Street Journal.
 201. ^  "USD/RUB exchange rate". Bloomberg L.P.
 202. ^  "China Embraces Russia", Bloomberg Business Week, October 9, 2014, pp 15–16.
 203. ^  "Land Use", CIA World Factbook
 204. ^  Data  by Rosstat  (Russian)
 205. ^  Russia takes the third place in the world by grain exports, rosbankjournal.ru (Russian)
 206. ^  Data  by Rosstat  (Russian)
 207. ^  "Agricultural land by type of owners", Rosstat, 2009 (Russian)
 208. ^  Main agricultural products by type of owners  Rosstat, 2009 (Russian)
 209. ^  Brown, Felicity (September 2, 2009). "Fish capture by country since 1950". Guardian. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 210. ^  "Exports and imports of fish and sea products", Rosstat, 2009 (Russian)
 211. ^  Глобальная оценка лесных ресурсов 2010 года [Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010]  (PDF)  (in Russian). FAO Forestry
      Working Paper 163, Rome, Italy. 2010.
 212. ^  "Innovations and investments urged to modernize Russian forest sector www.fao.org". FAO. September 25, 2012. Retrieved 
      May 4,  2013.
 213. ^  "The Russian Federation Forest Sector Outlook Study to 2030"  (PDF). FAO. Rome, Italy. 2012. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 214. ^  Russia, China in Deal On Refinery, Not Gas  by Jacob Gronholt-Pedersen. Wall Street Journal, September 22, 2010
 215. ^  Did A New Pipeline Just Make Russia The Most Important Energy Superpower By Far  by Graham Winfrey. Business Insider,
      January 6, 2010
 216. ^  Country Comparison :: Natural gas – proved reserves. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
 217. ^  Country Comparison :: Oil – proved reserves. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
 218. ^  "BP Statistical review of world energy June 2007". BP. June 2007. Archived from the original  (XLS)  on February 6, 2009.
      Retrieved October 22,  2007.
 219. ^  Country Comparison :: Natural gas – exports. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
 220. ^  Country Comparison :: Electricity – production. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
 221. ^  "BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2009: Hydroelectricity consumption". Archived from the original  on February
      6, 2009. Retrieved October 29,  2010.
 222. ^  Nuclear Power Plant Information, International Atomic Energy Agency. Retrieved June 12, 2006.
 223. ^  Russia builds nuclear power stations all over the world  at amur.kp.ru (Russian)
 224. ^  "China and Russia sign $400 billion 30-year gas deal". Russia Herald. Retrieved May 22,  2014.
 225. ^ a  b  "Russian Railways". Eng.rzd.ru. Archived from the original  on October 4, 2009. Retrieved January 2,  2010.
 226. ^  "Invest in Russia–Infrastructure". Invest.gov.ru. Archived from the original  on April 26, 2011. Retrieved April 27, 
      2010.
 227. ^  CIS railway timetable, route No. 002, Moscow-Pyongyang, August 2009. Note: several different routes have the same number.
 228. ^  CIS railway timetable, route No. 350, Kiev-Vladivostok, August 2009.
 229. ^  Rosstat statistics on length of roads  Retrieved June 10, 2009
 230. ^  "Transport in Russia". International Transport Statistics Database. iRAP. Archived from the original  on April 17, 2009.
      Retrieved February 17,  2009.
 231. ^  "Russian Atomic Icebreakers". English Russia. March 31, 2008. Retrieved April 27,  2015.
 232. ^  "CIA The World Factbook–Rank Order–Airports". Cia.gov. Retrieved January 19,  2011.
 233. ^  Yakov Sinai, ed. (2003). Russian Mathematicians in the 20th Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN
      978-981-02-4390-6.
 234. ^  "The Poincaré Conjecture". Claymath.org. Archived from the original  on April 28, 2013. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 235. ^  Panzerkampfwagen T-34(r)  by George Parada (n.d.) Achtung Panzer!  website. Retrieved November 17, 2008
 236. ^  Halberstadt, Hans Inside the Great Tanks The Crowood Press Ltd. Wiltshire, England 1997 94–96 ISBN 1-86126-270-1: "The
      T-54/T-55 series is the hands down, all time most popular tank in history".
 237. ^  "Weaponomics: The Economics of Small Arms"  (PDF). Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 238. ^  Medvedev outlines priorities for Russian economy's modernization  RIA Novosti
 239. ^  "American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics". Aiaa.org. Retrieved January 2,  2010.
 240. ^  "Russian space program in 2009: plans and reality". Russianspaceweb.com. Retrieved April 27,  2010.
 241. ^  United Nations:Sanitation Country Profile Russian Federation, 2004
 242. ^ a  b  c  Ethnic groups in Russia, 2002 census, Demoscope Weekly. Retrieved February 5, 2009.
 243. ^  "Resident population". Rosstat. Archived from the original  on March 3, 2012. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 244. ^  Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2011). "Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года. Том 1" [2010 All-Russian
      Population Census, vol. 1]. Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года (2010 All-Russia Population Census)  (in Russian). 
      Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved June 29,  2012.
 245. ^  "Demographics". Library of Congress. Retrieved January 16,  2008.
 246. ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  Modern demographics of Russia  by Rosstat. Retrieved on October 5, 2010
 247. ^  "Russia cracking down on illegal migrants". International Herald Tribune. January 15, 2007. Archived from the original 
      on September 15, 2008.
 248. ^  Putin tries to lure millions of Russian expats home  at the Wayback Machine  (archived May 25, 2010) Times Online.
      February 9, 2006.
 249. ^  Moya Flynn. Migrant resettlement in the Russian federation: reconstructing 'homes' and 'homelands', Anthem Press (2004).
      p. 15. ISBN 1-84331-117-8
 250. ^ a  b  "Demographic balance and crude rates at national level". Eurostat. Retrieved June 1,  2016.
 251. ^  "Russia's birth, mortality rates to equal by 2011–ministry". RIA Novosti. Retrieved February 10,  2008.
 252. ^  "Country Profile: Russia"  (PDF). Library of Congress—Federal Research Division. October 2006. Retrieved December 27, 
      2007.
 253. ^  "Russia trying to resolve demographic problem through immigration". rian.ru. July 14, 2006.
 254. ^  Russian birth rates 1950–2008  Demoscope Weekly. Retrieved October 2010.
 255. ^  "Immigration Drives Russian Population Increase". ria.ru. August 20, 2012.
 256. ^  Cities with over 1 million population  Rosstat
 257. ^  Cities with population between 500,000 and 1 million  Rosstat
 258. ^  "Russian Census of 2002". 4.3. Population by nationalities and knowledge of Russian; 4.4. Spreading of knowledge of
      languages (except Russian). Rosstat. Retrieved January 16,  2008.
 259. ^  "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 68, §2). Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 260. ^  "Russian". University of Toronto. Archived from the original  on January 6, 2007. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 261. ^  "Russian Language History". Foreigntranslations.com. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 262. ^  Matthias Gelbmann (March 19, 2013). "Russian is now the second most used language on the web". W3Techs. Q-Success.
      Retrieved June 17,  2013.
 263. ^  "JAXA - My Long Mission in Space".
 264. ^  Poser, Bill (May 5, 2004). "The languages of the UN". Itre.cis.upenn.edu. Retrieved October 29,  2010.
 265. ^ a  b  c  d  "Конституция Карачаево-Черкесской Республики от 5 марта 1996 г. / Глава 1. Основы конституционного строя".
 266. ^  "Конституция Республики Адыгея (принята на XIV сессии Законодательного Собрания (Хасэ) - Парламента Республики Адыгея 10
      марта 1995 года) / Глава 1. Права и свободы человека и гражданина".
 267. ^  "Конституция Республики Алтай (Основной Закон) (принята 7 июня 1997 г.) / Глава I. Общие положения".
 268. ^  Закон Республики Алтай «О языках». Глава I, статья 4
 269. ^  "Конституция Республики Башкортостан от 24 декабря 1993 г. N ВС-22/15 / Глава 1. Основы конституционного строя
      Республики
      Башкортостан".
 270. ^  "Конституция Республики Бурятия (принята Верховным Советом Республики Бурятия 22 февраля 1994 г.) / Глава 3.
      Государственно-правовой статус Республики Бурятия".
 271. ^  "Конституция Чеченской Республики (принята 23 марта 2003 г.) / Глава 1. Основы конституционного строя".
 272. ^  "Конституция Чувашской Республики (принята Государственным Советом Чувашской Республики 30 ноября 2000 г.) / Глава 1.
      Основы конституционного строя Чувашской Республики".
 273. ^ a  b  "Constitution of the Republic of Crimea". Article 10  (in Russian). State Council, Republic of Crimea. April 11,
      2014. Retrieved October 14,  2014.
 274. ^ a  b  "Конституция Республики Мордовия (принята 21 сентября 1995 г.) / Глава 1. Основы конституционного строя Республики
      Мордовия (п.п. 1 - 13)".
 275. ^  "Конституция Республики Ингушетия (принята 27 февраля 1994 г.)".
 276. ^ a  b  "Конституция Кабардино-Балкарской Республики от 1 сентября 1997 г. N 28-РЗ (принята Парламентом
      Кабардино-Балкарской
      Республики 1 сентября 1997 г.) (в редакции, принятой Конституционным Собранием 12 июля 2006 г., республиканских законов от
      28 июля 2001 г. / Глава III Государственное устройство".
 277. ^  "Степное Уложение (Конституция) Республики Калмыкия от 5 апреля 1994 г.".
 278. ^  "Конституция Республики Хакасия (принята на XVII сессии Верховного Совета Республики Хакасия (первого созыва) 25 мая
      1995
      года) / Глава III. Статус и административно-территориальное устройство Республики Хакасия".
 279. ^  "Конституция Республики Коми от 17 февраля 1994 г. / Глава III. Государственный статус Республики Коми и
      административно-территориальное устройство".
 280. ^ a  b  "Конституция Республики Марий Эл (принята Конституционным Собранием Республики Марий Эл 24 июня 1995 г.) / Глава I.
      Основы конституционного строя".
 281. ^  "Конституция Республики Северная Осетия-Алания (принята Верховным Советом Республики Северная Осетия 12 ноября 1994 г.)
      /
      Глава 1. Основы конституционного строя".
 282. ^  "Конституция Республики Татарстан от 6 ноября 1992 г. / Глава 1. Государственный Совет Республики Татарстан".
 283. ^  "Конституция Республики Тыва (принята Референдумом Республики Тыва 6 мая 2001 г.) / Глава I. Основы конституционного
      строя".
 284. ^  Статья 8. Конституция Удмуртской Республики
 285. ^  "Конституция (Основной Закон) Республики Саха (Якутия) / Глава 3. Национально-государственный статус,
      административно-территориальное устройство".
 286. ^  Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007. Russia. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 287. ^  Oleg Rapov, Russkaya tserkov v IX–pervoy treti XII veka  (The Russian Church from the 9th to the First 3rd of the 12th
      Century). Moscow, 1988.
 288. ^  Arto Luukkanen  (1994), The Party of Unbelief, Helsinki: Studia Historica 48, ISBN951-710-008-6, OCLC832629341
 289. ^ a  b  Kowalewski, David (October 1980). "Protest for Religious Rights in the USSR: Characteristics and Consequences". 
      Russian Review. 39  (4): 426–441. doi:10.2307/128810. JSTOR128810  – via JSTOR. (registration required (help)).
 290. ^  Ramet, Sabrina Petra. (Ed) (1993). Religious Policy in the Soviet Union. Cambridge University Press. p. 4.
 291. ^  Anderson, John (1994). Religion, State and Politics in the Soviet Union and Successor States. Cambridge, England:
      Cambridge University Press. p. 3. ISBN0-521-46784-5.
 292. ^  "Anti-religious Campaigns". Loc.gov. Retrieved September 19,  2011.
 293. ^  Country Studies: Russia-The Russian Orthodox Church  U.S. Library of Congress, Accessed April 3, 2008
 294. ^ a  b  Arena – Atlas of Religions and Nationalities in Russia. Sreda.org
 295. ^  Пресс выпуски - В России 74% православных и 7% мусульман [Press releases - In Russia 74% are Orthodox and 7% are Muslims]
      . levada.ru  (in Russian). December 17, 2012. Retrieved April 29,  2015.
 296. ^  Ценности: религиозность [Values: Religious]. fom.ru  (in Russian). June 14, 2013. Retrieved April 29,  2015.
 297. ^  "Global Christianity – A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population". Pew Research Center's
      Religion & Public Life Project. December 19, 2011. Retrieved April 29,  2015.
 298. ^  ВЦИОМ: Социальное самочувствие россиян и экономические реалии: непересекающиеся пространства? [MEETING OF THE SCIENTIFIC
      COUNCIL VCIOM: The social well-being of Russians and economic realities: a disjointed space?]. Russian Public Opinion
      Research Center  (in Russian). October 28, 2014. Retrieved April 29,  2015.
 299. ^  "Views on globalisation and faith"  (PDF). July 5, 2011. p. 40. Archived from the original  (PDF)  on January 17, 2013.
 300. ^  Rev. Canon Michael Bourdeaux (2002). "Trends in Religious Policy". In Imogen Bell. Eastern Europe, Russia and Central
      Asia 2003  (3 ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 47. ISBN978-1-85743-137-7. Retrieved April 29,  2015.
 301. ^  Сведения о религиозных организациях, зарегистрированных в Российской Федерации по данным Федеральной регистрационной
      службы [Data about religious organizations registered in Russian Federation according to Federal Migration Service records] 
      (in Russian). December 19, 2006. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 302. ^  "Over 90 percent of Russians are going to celebrate Easter anyway - poll". Interfax Religion. April 22, 2011. Retrieved 
      November 2,  2011.
 303. ^  "Russian Federation". Europe: Belarus, Russian Federation and Ukraine. World and Its Peoples. Marshall Cavendish. 2010.
      p. 1387. ISBN978-0-7614-7900-0. Retrieved April 29,  2015.
 304. ^  Ingvar Svanberg; David Westerlund (December 6, 2012). Islam Outside the Arab World. Routledge. p. 418. ISBN
      978-1-136-11330-7. Retrieved April 29,  2015.
 305. ^  2012 Survey Maps. "Ogonek", No. 34 (5243), August 27, 2012. Retrieved September 24, 2012.
 306. ^  Richard Hellie. "Russia". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved April 29,  2015.
 307. ^  Zuckerman, P. (2005). "Atheism: Contemporary Rates and Patterns". In Michael Martin. The Cambridge Companion to Atheism.
      Cambridge University Press.
 308. ^  Социологи вновь посчитали верующих россиян [Sociologists have counted Russian believers anew]  (in Russian). Sova Center.
      January 15, 2013. Retrieved April 29,  2013.
 309. ^  "Global Index of Religion and Atheism"  (PDF). WIN/Gallup International. Retrieved November 7,  2015.
 310. ^  Myers (2016). The New Tsar. p. 404.
 311. ^  Mark Woods, "How the Russian Orthodox Church is backing Vladimir Putin's new world order" Christian Today March 3, 2016
 312. ^  Andrew Higgins, "In Expanding Russian Influence, Faith Combines With Firepower," New York Times Sept 13, 2016
 313. ^  "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". Article 41. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 314. ^  Российский омбудсмен будет бороться с дискриминацией по "прописке" через суд [Russian ombudsman will be fighting
      discrimination based on passport "registration" in the courts]  (in Russian). June 6, 2007. Retrieved July 23,  2008.
 315. ^  "Healthcare in Russia – Don't Play Russian Roulette". justlanded.com. Retrieved October 3,  2010.
 316. ^  W. R. Leonard (April 2002). "Declining growth status of indigenous Siberian children in post-Soviet Russia". Human
      Biology. Retrieved December 27,  2007.[dead link]
 317. ^ a  b  ОЖИДАЕМАЯ ПРОДОЛЖИТЕЛЬНОСТЬ ЖИЗНИ ПРИ РОЖДЕНИИ [Life expectancy at birth]  (XLS). Rosstat. April 2, 2015. Retrieved 
      April 26,  2015.
 318. ^  Huffington Post: Countries With The MOST College Graduates  retrieved September 27, 2013
 319. ^  David Johnson, ed., Politics, Modernisation and Educational Reform in Russia: From Past to Present  (2010)
 320. ^  Smolentseva, A. "Bridging the Gap Between Higher and Secondary Education in Russia". Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 321. ^  "Background Note: Russia". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved January 2,  2008.
 322. ^  "Higher Education Institutions". Rosstat. Archived from the original  on March 3, 2012. Retrieved January 1,  2008.
 323. ^  "Education for All by 2015: will we make it?"  (PDF). EFA global monitoring report. 2008. Retrieved April 27,  2010.
 324. ^  "Higher education structure". State University Higher School of Economics. Archived from the original  on December 13,
      2010. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 325. ^  "How to Cook Golubtzy". Moscow-russia-insiders-guide.com. August 6, 2011. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 326. ^  The first stone tented roof church and the origins of the tented roof architecture  by Sergey Zagraevsky  at RusArch.ru 
      (Russian)
 327. ^  The shapes of domes of ancient Russian churches  by Sergey Zagraevsky  at the site of RusArch.ru (Russian)
 328. ^  Russian: Постановление ЦК КПСС и СМ СССР "Об устранении излишеств в проектировании и строительстве", November 4, 1955
      (Khrushchev's decree On liquidation of excesses ...) (Russian)
 329. ^  "Over 20,000 churches rebuilt in Russia in 20 years - Patriarch Kirill". rian.ru. December 3, 2010.
 330. ^  Russian Academy of Arts  official site.
 331. ^  Gray, Camilla (2002). Russian Experiment in Art. London: Thames and Hudson. p. 9.
 332. ^  Norris, Gregory; ed. Stanley, Sadie (1980). The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 2nd edition. London:
      MacMillian. p. 707. ISBN0-333-23111-2.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
 333. ^  "Russia::Music". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved October 5,  2009.
 334. ^  Garafola, L (1989). Diaghilev's Ballets Russes. Oxford University Press. p. 576. ISBN0-19-505701-5.
 335. ^  K. K. Cashin. "Alexander Pushkin's Influence on Russian Ballet—Chapter Five: Pushkin, Soviet Ballet, and Afterward"  
      (PDF). Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 336. ^  "A Tale of Two Operas". Petersburg City. Retrieved January 11,  2008.
 337. ^  History of Rock Music in Russia  at Russia-InfoCentre
 338. ^  Kelly, C (2001). Russian Literature: A Very Short Introduction (Paperback). Oxford Paperbacks. ISBN0-19-280144-9.
 339. ^  "Russian literature; Leo Tolstoy". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved April 11,  2008.
 340. ^  Otto Friedrich (September 6, 1971). "Freaking-Out with Fyodor". Time Magazine. Retrieved April 10,  2008.
 341. ^  McGuire, Patrick L. (1985). Red stars: political aspects of Soviet science fiction. Studies in speculative fiction (Vol.
      7, ill.). UMI Research Press. ISBN0-8357-1579-5.Glad, John (1971). Russian Soviet science fiction and related critical
      activity. New York University.Tevis, Yvonne Pacheco, Reginald, R. (1983). East of the Sun: Russian and Eastern European
      Science Fiction. Science fiction and fantasy criticism (Vol. 5). Ayer Company. ISBN0-88143-038-2.  CS1 maint: Multiple
      names: authors list (link)
 342. ^ a  b  "Russia:Motion pictures". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 343. ^  Birgit Beumers. A History of Russian Cinema. Berg Publishers (2009). ISBN 978-1-84520-215-6. p. 143.
 344. ^  "White Sun of the Desert". Film Society of Lincoln Center. Archived from the original  on September 5, 2008. Retrieved 
      January 18,  2008.
 345. ^  Dzieciolowski, Z. "Kinoeye: Russia's reviving film industry". Retrieved December 27,  2007.
 346. ^  "Russian Entertainment & Media Industry worth $27.9 bn by 2011". joomag magazine. Retrieved October 3,  2010.
 347. ^  "The USSR and Olympism"  (PDF). Olympic Review. International Olympic Committee  (84): 530–557. October 1974. Retrieved 
      March 28,  2008.
 348. ^  "IIHF Centennial All-Star Team". Iihf.com. Archived from the original  on June 10, 2009. Retrieved April 27,  2010.
 349. ^  "Pure gold: Russia repeats!". IIHF. May 10, 2009. Retrieved August 28,  2015.
 350. ^  "Russia dominates Slovakia to win 2012 IIHF gold; 2014 Sochi groups announced". Yahoo Sports. May 20, 2012.
 351. ^  "Russian league tops first CHL ranking". March 7, 2008. Retrieved August 28,  2015.
 352. ^  "World of difference for KHL?". iihf.com. May 7, 2012. Retrieved August 28,  2015.
 353. ^  "Russian Bandy Championship, 2006–7 season". bandy.ru. Retrieved October 3,  2010.
 354. ^  Ralph Hickok (February 18, 2013). "Bandy". Hickoksports.com. Retrieved May 4,  2013.
 355. ^  "Yashin, the impregnable Spider". FIFA. Retrieved November 28, 2013
 356. ^  "The greatest XI in the history of football ... and there's no room for Ronaldo, Eusebio and Best". Daily Mail. Retrieved
      November 28, 2013
 357. ^  "Legendary Olympians". CNN. August 19, 2008.
 358. ^  Tom Van Riper & Kurt Badenhausen (July 22, 2008). "Top-Earning Female Athletes". Forbes. Retrieved August 1,  2008.
 359. ^  "Chessgames guide to the World Championship". Chessgames.com. Retrieved October 29,  2010.
 360. ^  Sappenfield, Mark (February 24, 2014). "Sochi Olympics report card: So how good were Putin's Games?". The Christian
      Science Monitor. Retrieved February 25,  2014.
 361. ^  Grohmann, Karolos (February 23, 2014). "'Excellent' Sochi Games proved critics wrong, says IOC's Bach". Reuters.
      Retrieved February 25,  2014.
 362. ^  "Russia secures 2014 grand prix deal". ESPN. Retrieved October 24,  2011.
 363. ^  "Official days off for public holidays in Russia". Sras.org. Retrieved October 29,  2010.
 364. ^  "Tourism Highlights 2014"  (PDF). UNWTO (World Tourism Organization). 2014. Retrieved January 20,  2015.
 365. ^  Kuzmin, Viktor (July 3, 2014). "Concern in Russia as foreign tourist numbers slump".

EXTERNAL LINKS
Find more about
Russia
at Wikipedia's sister projectsDefinitions  from WiktionaryMedia  from CommonsNews  from WikinewsQuotations  from WikiquoteTexts 
from WikisourceTextbooks  from WikibooksTravel guide  from WikivoyageLearning resources  from WikiversityLook up Russia, Россия,
or Русь  in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.Government * Official Russian governmental portal
 * Chief of State and Cabinet Members
 * Russian News Agency "Ria Novosti"
 * Russian radio "Voice of Russia"

General information * Russia  at DMOZ
 *   Wikimedia Atlas of Russia
 *   Geographic data related to Russia  at OpenStreetMap
 * "Russia". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
 * Russia  at UCB Libraries GovPubs
 * Russia  from the BBC News
 * Russia  at Encyclopædia Britannica
 * Key Development Forecasts for Russia  from International Futures

Other * Post-Soviet Problems  from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
 * Russia Beyond the Headlines  International news project about Russia
 * Official Russia Travel Guide
 * Russian Consulate

Articles related to Russia * v
 * t
 * e

Russia articlesHistoryTimeline * Proto-Indo-Europeans
 * Scythians
 * East Slavs
 * Rus' Khaganate
 * Kievan Rus'
 * Novgorod Republic
 * Vladimir-Suzdal
 * Grand Duchy of Moscow
 * Tsardom of Russia
 * Russian Empire
 * Russian Republic
 * Russian SFSR
 * Soviet Union
 * Russian Federation

By topic * Economy
 * Military
 * Journalism  ‎
 * Postal

Geography * Subdivisions
 * Borders
 * Geology
 * European Russia
 * Caucasus Mountains
 * North Caucasus
 * Caspian Sea
 * Ural Mountains
 * West Siberian Plain
 * Siberia
 * Russian Far East
 * North Asia
 * Extreme points
 * Cities and towns
 * Islands
 * Lakes
 * Rivers
 * Volcanoes
 * Climate

Politics * Conscription
 * Constitution
 * Elections
 * Federal budget
 * Foreign relations
 * Freedom of assembly
 * Freedom of press * Media
   
   
 * Government
 * Human rights
 * Judiciary
 * Law * Citizenship
   
   
 * Civil Service
 * Law enforcement  (Prisons)
 * Liberalism
 * Military
 * Opposition
 * Political parties
 * President of Russia

Economy * Agriculture
 * Aircraft industry
 * Car industry
 * Banking
 * Central Bank
 * Corruption
 * Defence industry
 * Economic regions
 * Energy
 * Fishing industry
 * Forestry
 * Gambling
 * Mining
 * Petroleum industry
 * Russian ruble
 * Russian oligarchs
 * Space industry
 * Shipbuilding
 * Trade unions
 * Taxation
 * Tourism
 * Transport
 * Telecommunications
 * Waste

Society * Demographics
 * Citizens
 * Abortion
 * Alcoholism
 * Crime
 * Education
 * Healthcare
 * Ethnic groups
 * Languages
 * LGBT
 * Immigration * Illegal
   
   
 * Prostitution
 * Racism
 * Religion
 * Suicide
 * Water supply and sanitation
 * Women

Culture * Architecture
 * Art
 * Literature
 * Ballet
 * Cinema
 * Graffiti
 * Inventions
 * Media
 * Music
 * Public holidays
 * Opera
 * Language
 * Cuisine
 * Martial arts
 * Folklore
 * Television
 * Internet
 * National anthem
 * Coat of arms
 * National flag
 * Sports

 * Outline

 * Book
 * Category
 * Portal

 * v
 * t
 * e

Russian souvenirs, arts and crafts
Handicrafts * Gorodets painting
 * Gzhel
 * Filimonovo toy
 * Kholmogory bone carving
 * Khokhloma
 * Russian lacquer art * Fedoskino miniature
    * Kholuy miniature
    * Mstyora miniature
    * Palekh miniature
   
   
 * Russian icons
 * Zhostovo painting


Tableware * Table-glass
 * Podstakannik
 * Russian porcelain * Dulyovo porcelain
   
   
 * Samovar

Clothing * Afghanka
 * Budenovka
 * Cherkeska
 * Gymnastyorka
 * Kokoshnik
 * Kosovorotka
 * Lapti
 * Orenburg shawl
 * Papakha
 * Peaked cap
 * Podvorotnichok
 * Sailor cap
 * Sarafan
 * Spetsodezhda
 * Telnyashka
 * Ushanka
 * Valenki

Musical
instruments * Balalaika
 * Garmon
 * Bayan
 * Russian guitar
 * Musical spoons
 * Treshchotka

Toys * Bird of Happiness
 * Cheburashka
 * Filimonovo toy
 * Dymkovo toys
 * Kargopol toys
 * Matryoshka doll
 * Petrushka

Other * Izba
 * Fabergé egg
 * Shashka
 * Tula gingerbread

 * v
 * t
 * e

Subdivisions of RussiaFederal subjectsRepublics * Adygea
 * Altai
 * Bashkortostan
 * Buryatia
 * Chechnya
 * Chuvashia
 * Crimea1
 * Dagestan
 * Ingushetia
 * Kabardino-Balkaria
 * Kalmykia
 * Karachay-Cherkessia
 * Karelia
 * Khakassia
 * Komi
 * Mari El
 * Mordovia
 * North Ossetia-Alania
 * Sakha
 * Tatarstan
 * Tuva
 * Udmurtia

Krais * Altai
 * Kamchatka
 * Khabarovsk
 * Krasnodar
 * Krasnoyarsk
 * Perm
 * Primorsky
 * Stavropol
 * Zabaykalsky

Oblasts * Amur
 * Arkhangelsk
 * Astrakhan
 * Belgorod
 * Bryansk
 * Chelyabinsk
 * Irkutsk
 * Ivanovo
 * Kaliningrad
 * Kaluga
 * Kemerovo
 * Kirov
 * Kostroma
 * Kurgan
 * Kursk
 * Leningrad
 * Lipetsk
 * Magadan
 * Moscow
 * Murmansk
 * Nizhny Novgorod
 * Novgorod
 * Novosibirsk
 * Omsk
 * Orenburg
 * Oryol
 * Penza
 * Pskov
 * Rostov
 * Ryazan
 * Sakhalin
 * Samara
 * Saratov
 * Smolensk
 * Sverdlovsk
 * Tambov
 * Tomsk
 * Tula
 * Tver
 * Tyumen
 * Ulyanovsk
 * Vladimir
 * Volgograd
 * Vologda
 * Voronezh
 * Yaroslavl

Federal cities * Moscow
 * St. Petersburg
 * Sevastopol1

Autonomous oblast * Jewish

Autonomous okrugs * Chukotka
 * Khanty-Mansi2
 * Nenets3
 * Yamalo-Nenets2

 * 1Claimed by Ukraine  and considered by most of the international community to be part of Ukraine
 * 2Administratively subordinated to Tyumen Oblast
 * 3Administratively subordinated to Arkhangelsk Oblast

Internal additional non-constitutional divisions by different institutions * Economic regions  (by Ministry of Economic Development)
 * Military districts  (by Ministry of Defence)
 * Federal districts  (by President)
 * Judicial districts  (by law "On arbitration courts")

 * v
 * t
 * e

World Heritage Sites in Russia  by federal district

Central * Church of the Ascension in Kolomenskoye
 * Moscow Kremlin  and  Red Square
 * Novodevichy Convent
 * Trinity Sergius Lavra
 * White Monuments of Vladimir and Suzdal
 * Historic Centre of Yaroslavl



Southern * Western Caucasus

Northwestern * Curonian Spit1
 * Ferapontov Monastery
 * Kizhi Pogost
 * Virgin Komi Forests
 * Historic Monuments of Novgorod and Surroundings
 * Historic Centre of Saint Petersburg and Surroundings
 * Solovetsky Islands
 * Struve Geodetic Arc2

Far Eastern * Lena Pillars
 * Volcanoes of Kamchatka
 * Central Sikhote-Alin
 * Wrangel Island

Siberian * Golden Mountains of Altai
 * Lake Baikal
 * Putorana Plateau
 * Uvs Nuur Basin3

Volga * Bolghar
 * Kazan Kremlin

North Caucasian * Citadel, Ancient City and Fortress Buildings of Derbent

 * 1  Shared with Lithuania
 * 2  Shared with nine other countries
 * 3  Shared with Mongolia

 * v
 * t
 * e

People from RussiaPolitical  and religious leaders * Pre-1168
 * 1168–1917
 * 1922–1991
 * 1991–present
 * RSFSR leaders
 * General secretaries
 * Soviet premiers  (1st deputies)
 * Soviet heads of state  (and their spouses)
 * Prime ministers  (1st deputies)
 * Foreign ministers
 * Prosecutors general
 * Metropolitans and Patriarchs
 * Saints  (1, 2)

Military figures and explorers * Field marshals
 * Soviet marshals
 * Admirals
 * Aviators
 * Cosmonauts

Scientists, engineers and inventors * Aerospace engineers
 * Astronomers and astrophysicists
 * Biologists
 * Chemists
 * Earth scientists
 * Electrical engineers
 * IT developers
 * Linguists and philologists
 * Mathematicians
 * Naval engineers
 * Physicians and psychologists
 * Physicists
 * Weaponry makers

Artists  and writers * Architects
 * Ballet dancers
 * Composers
 * Opera singers
 * Novelists
 * Philosophers
 * Playwrights
 * Poets

Sportspeople * Chess players

Geographic locale * v
 * t
 * e

Sovereign states and dependencies  of EuropeSovereign states * Albania
 * Andorra
 * Armenia1
 * Austria
 * Azerbaijan1
 * Belarus
 * Belgium
 * Bosnia and Herzegovina
 * Bulgaria
 * Croatia
 * Cyprus1
 * Czech Republic
 * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * France
 * Georgia1
 * Germany
 * Greece1
 * Hungary
 * Iceland
 * Ireland
 * Italy
 * Kazakhstan1
 * Latvia
 * Liechtenstein
 * Lithuania
 * Luxembourg
 * Macedonia
 * Malta
 * Moldova
 * Monaco
 * Montenegro
 * Netherlands
 * Norway
 * Poland
 * Portugal
 * Romania
 * Russia1
 * San Marino
 * Serbia
 * Slovakia
 * Slovenia
 * Spain2
 * Sweden
 * Switzerland
 * Turkey1
 * Ukraine
 * United Kingdom
 * Vatican City

States with limited
recognition * Abkhazia1
 * Kosovo
 * Nagorno-Karabakh1
 * Northern Cyprus1
 * South Ossetia1
 * Transnistria

Dependencies  and
other territoriesDenmark * Faroe Islands * constituent country
   
   

Finland * Åland Islands * autonomous region
   
   

Norway * Jan Mayen
 * Svalbard * unincorporated areas
   
   

United Kingdom * Akrotiri and Dhekelia1 * sovereign base areas
   
   
 * Gibraltar * overseas territory
   
   
 * Guernsey
 * Isle of Man
 * Jersey * crown dependencies
   
   

1  Partially  in Asia, or entirely in Asia with cultural links to Europe. 2  Partially  in Africa * v
 * t
 * e

Countries and dependencies  of AsiaSovereign states * Afghanistan
 * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Bahrain
 * Bangladesh
 * Bhutan
 * Brunei
 * Cambodia
 * China
 * Cyprus
 * Egypt
 * Georgia
 * India
 * Indonesia
 * Iran
 * Iraq
 * Israel
 * Japan
 * Jordan
 * Kazakhstan
 * North Korea
 * South Korea
 * Kuwait
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Laos
 * Lebanon
 * Malaysia
 * Maldives
 * Mongolia
 * Myanmar
 * Nepal
 * Oman
 * Pakistan
 * Philippines
 * Qatar
 * Russia
 * Saudi Arabia
 * Singapore
 * Sri Lanka
 * Syria
 * Tajikistan
 * Thailand
 * East Timor (Timor-Leste)
 * Turkey
 * Turkmenistan
 * United Arab Emirates
 * Uzbekistan
 * Vietnam
 * Yemen

States with limited recognition * Abkhazia
 * Nagorno-Karabakh
 * Northern Cyprus
 * Palestine
 * South Ossetia
 * Taiwan

Dependencies  and  special
administrative regionsAustralia * Christmas Island
 * Cocos (Keeling) Islands

China * Hong Kong
 * Macau

United Kingdom * Akrotiri and Dhekelia
 * British Indian Ocean Territory

 * v
 * t
 * e

Countries bordering the Baltic Sea * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * Germany
 * Latvia
 * Lithuania
 * Poland
 * Russia
 * Sweden

 * v
 * t
 * e

Black SeaCountries bordering the Black Sea * Bulgaria
 * Georgia
 * Romania
 * Russia
 * Turkey
 * Ukraine

Cities * Batumi
 * Burgas
 * Constanța
 * Giresun
 * Hopa
 * Istanbul
 * Kerch
 * Mangalia
 * Năvodari
 * Novorossiysk
 * Odessa
 * Ordu
 * Poti
 * Rize
 * Samsun
 * Sevastopol
 * Sochi
 * Sukhumi1
 * Trabzon
 * Varna
 * Yalta
 * Zonguldak

1  Disputed statehood — partial international recognition, but considered by most countries to be Georgian territory.International
organizations * v
 * t
 * e

Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) * Australia
 * Brunei
 * Canada
 * Chile
 * China
 * Hong Kong¹
 * Indonesia
 * Japan
 * South Korea
 * Malaysia
 * Mexico
 * New Zealand
 * Papua New Guinea
 * Peru
 * Philippines
 * Russia
 * Singapore
 * Taiwan²
 * Thailand
 * United States
 * Vietnam

Meetings * 1989
 * 1990
 * 1991
 * 1992
 * 1993
 * 1994
 * 1995
 * 1996
 * 1997
 * 1998
 * 1999
 * 2000
 * 2001
 * 2002
 * 2003
 * 2004
 * 2005
 * 2006
 * 2007
 * 2008
 * 2009
 * 2010
 * 2011
 * 2012
 * 2013
 * 2014
 * 2015
 * 2016
 * 2017

Other * APEC Business Travel Card
 * APEC blue
 * APEC Youth Science Festival

1.  A special administrative region  of China, participates as "Hong Kong, China" 2. Officially the Republic of China,
participates as "Chinese Taipei" * v
 * t
 * e

BRICSMembership *   Brazil
 *   Russia
 *   India
 *   China
 *   South Africa

Summits * Yekaterinburg 2009
 * Brasília 2010
 * Sanya 2011
 * New Delhi 2012
 * Durban 2013
 * Fortaleza 2014
 * Ufa 2015
 * Goa 2016

Bilateral relations * Brazil–China
 * Brazil–India
 * Brazil–Russia
 * Brazil–South Africa
 * China–India
 * China–Russia
 * China–South Africa
 * India–Russia
 * India–South Africa
 * Russia–South Africa

Leaders *   Temer
 *   Putin
 *   Modi
 *   Xi
 *   Zuma

Related * New Development Bank
 * BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement
 * BRICS Leaders
 * BRICS Cable
 * BRICS Universities League

BRICS U-17 Football Cup * 2016 Goa

 * v
 * t
 * e

Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS) * Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia
 * Eurasian Economic Union
 * Union State

MembershipMembers * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Belarus
 * Kazakhstan
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Moldova
 * Russia
 * Tajikistan
 * Uzbekistan

Associate members * Turkmenistan
 * Ukraine

Former members * Georgia  (1993–2009)

History * Russian Empire
 * Soviet Union
 * Union of Sovereign States
 * Belavezha Accords  (Near abroad)
 * Alma-Ata Protocol

Sports * Unified Team at the Olympics
 * Unified Team at the Paralympics
 * CIS national bandy team
 * CIS national football team
 * CIS national ice hockey team
 * CIS national rugby team
 * CIS Cup (football)

Military * Collective Security Treaty Organization
 * Collective Rapid Reaction Force
 * Joint CIS Air Defense System

Economics * Economic Court
 * CISFTA
 * Eurasian Economic Community
 * Eurasian Patent Convention
 * Eurasian Patent Organization
 * EU Technical Aid

Organization * Interstate Aviation Committee

 *   Category

 * v
 * t
 * e

Council of EuropeInstitutions * Secretary General
 * Committee of Ministers
 * Parliamentary Assembly
 * Congress
 * Court of Human Rights
 * Commissioner for Human Rights
 * Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
 * Commission against Racism and Intolerance

Members * Albania
 * Andorra
 * Armenia
 * Austria
 * Azerbaijan
 * Belgium
 * Bosnia and Herzegovina
 * Bulgaria
 * Croatia
 * Cyprus
 * Czech Republic
 * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * France
 * Georgia
 * Germany
 * Greece
 * Hungary
 * Iceland
 * Ireland
 * Italy
 * Latvia
 * Liechtenstein
 * Lithuania
 * Luxembourg
 * Macedonia1
 * Malta
 * Moldova
 * Monaco
 * Montenegro
 * Netherlands
 * Norway
 * Poland
 * Portugal
 * Romania
 * Russia
 * San Marino
 * Serbia
 * Slovakia
 * Slovenia
 * Spain
 * Sweden
 * Switzerland
 * Turkey
 * Ukraine
 * United Kingdom

Observers * Canada
 * Holy See
 * Israel
 * Japan
 * Mexico
 * United States
 * Sovereign Military Order of Malta

Former members * Czechoslovakia (1991–1992)
 * Saar (assoc. 1950–1956)

1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute. * 
   
   v
 * 
   
   t
 * 
   
   e

East Asia Summit (EAS) * First
 * Second
 * Third
 * Fourth
 * Fifth
 * Sixth
 * Seventh
 * Eighth
 * Ninth
 * Tenth
 * Eleventh

 * Australia
 * Brunei
 * Cambodia
 * China
 * India
 * Indonesia
 * Japan
 * Laos
 * Malaysia
 * Myanmar
 * New Zealand
 * Philippines
 * Russia
 * Singapore
 * South Korea
 * Thailand
 * United States
 * Vietnam

 * v
 * t
 * e

Eurasian Economic Union (EEU)Member states * Armenia
 * Belarus
 * Kazakhstan
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Russia

 * v
 * t
 * e

Group of Eight (G8)  and Group of Eight + Five (G8+5)G8 members * Canada
 * France
 * Germany
 * Italy
 * Japan
 * Russia
 * United Kingdom
 * United States

Representative * European Union

G8+5 * Brazil
 * China
 * India
 * Mexico
 * South Africa

See also * Group of Six
 * Group of Seven
 * G7+1

 * v
 * t
 * e

G20 major economies *   Argentina
 *   Australia
 *   Brazil
 *   Canada
 *   China
 *   European Union
 *   France
 *   Germany
 *   India
 *   Indonesia
 *   Italy
 *   Japan
 *   Mexico
 *   Russia
 *   Saudi Arabia
 *   South Africa
 *   Republic of Korea
 *   Turkey
 *   United Kingdom
 *   United States

 * v
 * t
 * e

Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) * Albania
 * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan

 * Bulgaria
 * Georgia
 * Greece

 * Moldova
 * Romania
 * Russia

 * Serbia
 * Turkey
 * Ukraine

 * v
 * t
 * e

Quartet on the Middle EastNegotiating parties * Israel
 * Palestinian Authority

Diplomatic quartet * European Union  (Mogherini)
 * Russia  (Lavrov)
 * United Nations  (Ban)
 * United States  (Kerry)

Special Envoy * Tony Blair

Associated organizations * Elections Reform Support Group

 * v
 * t
 * e

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)Summits * Beijing 2012
 * Dushanbe 2014

Member states * China
 * India
 * Kazakhstan
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Pakistan
 * Russia
 * Tajikistan
 * Uzbekistan

Observer states * Afghanistan
 * Iran
 * Mongolia

Dialogue partners * Belarus
 * Sri Lanka
 * Turkey

Guests * ASEAN
 * CIS
 * Turkmenistan

See also * Eurasian Land Bridge
 * Three Evils
 * Working languages * Chinese
    * Russian
   
   

 * v
 * t
 * e

Security Council  of the United NationsPower * Chapter V
 * Chapter VII
 * Veto
 * Resolution

Organization * Military Observer
 * Peacebuilding Commission
 * Counter-Terrorism Committee
 * Peacekeeping

Missions * United Nations Command
 * Unified Task Force

MembersPermanent * China
 * France
 * Russia
 * United Kingdom
 * United States

Term ends end of 2016 * Angola
 * Malaysia
 * New Zealand
 * Spain
 * Venezuela

Term starts start of 2016 * Egypt
 * Japan
 * Senegal
 * Ukraine
 * Uruguay

 *   Category

 * v
 * t
 * e

World Trade OrganizationSystem * Accession and membership
 * Appellate Body
 * Dispute Settlement Body
 * International Trade Centre
 * Chronology of key events

Issues * Criticism
 * Doha Development Round
 * Singapore issues
 * Quota Elimination
 * Peace Clause

Agreements * General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
 * Agriculture
 * Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
 * Technical Barriers to Trade
 * Trade Related Investment Measures
 * Trade in Services
 * Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
 * Government Procurement
 * Information Technology
 * Marrakech Agreement
 * Doha Declaration
 * Bali Package

Ministerial
Conferences * 1st (1996)
 * 2nd (1998)
 * 3rd (1999)
 * 4th (2001)
 * 5th (2003)
 * 6th (2005)
 * 7th (2009)
 * 8th (2011)
 * 9th (2013)
 * 10th (2015)

People * Roberto Azevêdo  (Director-General)
 * Pascal Lamy  (former Director-General)
 * Supachai Panitchpakdi  (former Director-General)
 * Deputy Directors-General: * Yonov Frederick Agah
    * Karl Brauner
    * David Shark
    * Yi Xiaozhun * former: Alejandro Jara
       * Valentine Rugwabiza
       * Harsha Singh
       * Rufus Yerxa
      
      
   
   

Members * Afghanistan
 * Albania
 * Algeria
 * Angola
 * Antigua and Barbuda
 * Argentina
 * Armenia
 * Australia
 * Bahrain
 * Bangladesh
 * Barbados
 * Belize
 * Benin
 * Bolivia
 * Botswana
 * Brazil
 * Brunei
 * Burkina Faso
 * Burma
 * Burundi
 * Cambodia
 * Cameroon
 * Canada
 * Cape Verde
 * Central African Republic
 * Chad
 * Chile
 * China
 * Colombia
 * Democratic Republic of the Congo
 * Republic of the Congo
 * Costa Rica
 * Côte d'Ivoire
 * Cuba
 * Djibouti
 * Dominica
 * Dominican Republic
 * Ecuador
 * Egypt
 * El Salvador
 * European Union¹
 * Fiji
 * Gabon
 * The Gambia
 * Georgia
 * Ghana
 * Grenada
 * Guatemala
 * Guinea
 * Guinea-Bissau
 * Guyana
 * Haiti
 * Honduras
 * Hong Kong²
 * Iceland
 * India
 * Indonesia
 * Israel
 * Jamaica
 * Japan
 * Jordan
 * Kazakhstan
 * Kenya
 * South Korea
 * Kuwait
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Laos
 * Lesotho
 * Liberia
 * Liechtenstein
 * Macau²
 * Macedonia
 * Madagascar
 * Malawi
 * Malaysia
 * Maldives
 * Mali
 * Mauritania
 * Mauritius
 * Mexico
 * Moldova
 * Mongolia
 * Montenegro
 * Morocco
 * Mozambique
 * Namibia
 * Nepal
 * New Zealand
 * Nicaragua
 * Niger
 * Nigeria
 * Norway
 * Oman
 * Pakistan
 * Panama
 * Papua New Guinea
 * Paraguay
 * Peru
 * Philippines
 * Qatar
 * Russia
 * Rwanda
 * St. Kitts and Nevis
 * St. Lucia
 * St. Vincent and the Grenadines
 * Samoa
 * Saudi Arabia
 * Senegal
 * Seychelles
 * Sierra Leone
 * Singapore
 * Solomon Islands
 * South Africa
 * Sri Lanka
 * Suriname
 * Swaziland
 * Switzerland
 * Tajikistan
 * Taiwan³
 * Tanzania
 * Thailand
 * Togo
 * Tonga
 * Trinidad and Tobago
 * Tunisia
 * Turkey
 * Uganda
 * Ukraine
 * United Arab Emirates
 * United States
 * Uruguay
 * Venezuela
 * Vietnam
 * Yemen
 * Zambia
 * Zimbabwe


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. All twenty-eight member states of the European Union  are also members of the WTO in their own right:

 * Austria
 * Belgium
 * Bulgaria
 * Croatia
 * Cyprus
 * Czech Republic
 * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * France
 * Germany
 * Greece
 * Hungary
 * Ireland
 * Italy
 * Latvia
 * Lithuania
 * Luxembourg
 * Malta
 * Netherlands
 * Poland
 * Portugal
 * Romania
 * Slovakia
 * Slovenia
 * Spain
 * Sweden
 * United Kingdom


2. Special administrative regions of the People's Republic of China, participates as "Hong Kong, China" and "Macao China".
3. Officially the Republic of China, participates as "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu", and
"Chinese Taipei" in short.

Authority control * WorldCat Identities
 * VIAF: 168830626
 * LCCN: n92056007
 * GND: 4076899-5
 * SUDOC: 031531156
 * BNF: cb122728378  (data)
 * NDL: 00569699
 * NKC: ge130512