This article is about the country in Eurasia. For other uses, see Azerbaijan (disambiguation).Republic of Azerbaijan
Azərbaycan Respublikası(Azerbaijani)FlagEmblemAnthem: * Azərbaycan marşı
 * "March of Azerbaijan"
 * 

Location of Azerbaijan (green) and Nagorno Karabakh  (light green).CapitalBaku
40°25′N 49°50′E﻿ /40.417°N 49.833°E﻿ / 40.417; 49.833Official languagesAzerbaijaniDemonymAzerbaijaniGovernmentUnitary  
dominant-party  semi-presidential  republic •PresidentIlham Aliyev •Prime MinisterArtur RasizadeLegislatureNational Assembly
Formation •Democratic Republic28 May 1918 •Soviet Socialist Republic28 April 1920 •Independence from Soviet Union30 August 1991
(declared)
18 October 1991 (independence)
25 December 1991 (completed) •Constitution  adopted12 November 1995Area •Total86,600 km2  (114th)
33,436 sq mi •Water (%)1.6Population •2016 estimate9,754,830[1]  (89th) •Density112.6/km2  (103rd)
291.7/sq miGDP (PPP)2015 estimate •Total$168.4 billion[2] •Per capita$17,500[2]GDP (nominal)2015 estimate •Total$63.983 billion[2]
 •Per capita$6,794[2]Gini (2008)33.7[3]
mediumHDI  (2013)0.751[4]
high·  76thCurrencyManat  (₼) (AZN)Time zoneAZT  (UTC+04)Drives on therightCalling code+994ISO 3166 codeAZInternet TLD.aza.The
Nagorno-Karabakh Republic is an unrecognised  de facto  sovereign state, widely considered de jure  part of Azerbaijan.Azerbaijan  (i/ˌæzərbaɪˈdʒɑːn/  AZ-ər-by-JAHN; Azerbaijani: Azərbaycan), officially the Republic of Azerbaijan  (Azerbaijani: 
Azərbaycan Respublikası), is a country in the South Caucasus  region, situated at the crossroads of Southwest Asia and
Southeastern Europe.[5]  It is bounded by the Caspian Sea  to the east, Russia  to the north, Georgia  to the northwest, Armenia 
to the west and Iran  to the south. The exclave  of Nakhchivan  is bounded by Armenia to the north and east, Iran to the south and
west, while having an 8 km border with Turkey in the north west.

The Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  proclaimed its independence in 1918. The country was incorporated into the Soviet Union in
1920 as the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic.[6][7]  The modern Republic of Azerbaijan proclaimed its independence on 30
August 1991,[8]  prior to the official dissolution of the USSR  in December 1991. In September 1991, the Armenian majority of the
disputed Nagorno-Karabakh  region seceded to form the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.[9]  The region and seven adjacent districts
outside it  became de facto  independent with the end of the Nagorno-Karabakh War  in 1994. These regions are internationally
recognized as part of Azerbaijan pending a solution to the status of the Nagorno-Karabakh, found through negotiations facilitated
by the OSCE.[10][11][12][13]

Azerbaijan is a unitary semi-presidential  republic. The country is a member state of the Council of Europe, the OSCE  and the 
NATO  Partnership for Peace  (PfP) program. It is one of six independent Turkic states, an active member of the Turkic Council 
and the TÜRKSOY  community. Azerbaijan has diplomatic relations with 158 countries and holds membership in 38 international
organizations.[14]  It is one of the founding members of GUAM, the Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS)[15]  and the 
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. A member of the United Nations since 1992, Azerbaijan was elected to
membership in the newly established Human Rights Council  by the United Nations General Assembly  on 9 May 2006. Its term of
office began on 19 June 2006.[16]  Azerbaijan is also a member state of the Non-Aligned Movement, holds observer status in World
Trade Organization  and is a correspondent at the International Telecommunication Union.[14][17]

The Constitution of Azerbaijan  does not declare an official religion and all major political forces in the country are secularist
. However, the majority of the population consists of Shiite Muslims.[18]  Azerbaijan has a high level of human development  which
ranks on par with most Eastern European countries.[19]  It has a high rate of economic development[20]  and literacy,[21]  as well
as a low rate of unemployment.[22]

However, corruption in Azerbaijan is widespread, especially in the public service.[23][24]  The ruling party, the New Azerbaijan
Party, has been accused of authoritarianism and human rights abuses.[25][26]



ETYMOLOGY
Azerbaijan and its main citiesAccording to a modern etymology, the name of Azerbaijan derives from that of Atropates,[27][28]  a Persian[29][30][31]  satrap 
under the Achaemenid Empire, who was later reinstated as the satrap of Media  under Alexander the Great.[32][33]  The original
etymology of this name is thought to have its roots in the once-dominant Zoroastrian  religion. In the Avesta, Frawardin Yasht 
("Hymn to the Guardian Angels"), there is a mention of âterepâtahe ashaonô fravashîm ýazamaide, which literally translates from 
Avestan  as "we worship the Fravashi  of the holy Atropatene."[34]

Atropates  ruled over the region of Atropatene  (present Iranian Azerbaijan). The name "Atropates" itself is the Greek
transliteration of an Old Iranian, probably Median, compounded name with the meaning "Protected by the (Holy) Fire" or "The Land
of the (Holy) Fire".[35]  The Greek name was mentioned by Diodorus Siculus  and Strabo. Over the span of millennia the name
evolved to Āturpātākān  (Middle Iranian) then to Ādharbādhagān, Ādharbāyagān, Āzarbāydjān  (New Persian) and present-day 
Azerbaijan. Ultimately, the name Azerbaijan  comes from Azar-Payegan. This word is translatable as Guardian of Fire, "The
Treasury" and "The Treasurer" of fire  or "The Land of Fire"[35]  in Modern Persian.[36]  The name was changed to Azerbaijan 
following the Arab conquest in the 7th century AD; Arabic  lacked the letters G  and P, so Arabic speakers modified the spelling
of Azer-payegan.

In 1918, the Musavat government  adopted the name "Azerbaijan" for the newly established Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, which was
proclaimed on 27 May 1918,[37]  for political reasons,[38][39]  even though the name of "Azerbaijan" had always been used to refer
to the adjacent region of contemporary northwestern Iran.[40][41][42]  Thus, until 1918, when the Musavat regime decided to name
the newly independent state Azerbaijan, this designation had been used exclusively to identify the Iranian province of Azerbaijan.

[41][42][43]

HISTORY
Main article: History of AzerbaijanANTIQUITY
Further information: Atropatene  and Caucasian AlbaniaPetroglyphs  in Gobustan  dating back to 10,000 BC indicating a thriving
culture. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site  considered to be of "outstanding universal value".The earliest evidence of human
settlement in the territory of Azerbaijan dates back to the late Stone Age  and is related to the Guruchay culture  of the Azykh
Cave.[44]  The Upper Paleolithic  and late Bronze Age  cultures are attested in the caves of Tağılar, Damcılı, Zar, Yataq-yeri and
in the necropolises  of Leylatepe and Saraytepe.

Early settlements included the Scythians  in the 9th century BC.[35]  Following the Scythians, Iranian Medes  came to dominate the
area to the south of the Aras.[33]  The Medes forged a vast empire between 900–700 BC, which was integrated into the Achaemenid
Empire  around 550 BC. The area was conquered by the Achaemenids leading to the spread of Zoroastrianism.[45]  Later it became
part of Alexander the Great's Empire  and its successor, the Seleucid Empire. During this period, Zoroastrianism spread in the
Caucasus and Atropatene. Caucasian Albanians, the original inhabitants of northeastern Azerbaijan, ruled that area from around the
4th century BC, and established an independent kingdom.

In the 4th and 3rd centuries BC, following the overthrow of the Achaemenid Empire, the southwestern part of modern Azerbaijan was
part of the Kingdom of Armenia ruled by the Orontid Dynasty; between the years 189 BC and 428 AD the western half of modern
Azerbaijan, including the exclave of Nakhchivan, were included into the Kingdom of Greater Armenia  ruled by Armenia's Artaxiad 
and Arsacid  dynasties,[46][47]  the latter itself a branch of the eponymous Arsacid dynasty of Parthia.

After the partition of the Kingdom of Armenia  by Iran  and Byzantium  in 387 AD, the provinces of Artsakh  and Utik, which had an
ethnically mixed population, passed to Caucasian Albania.[48][49]

FEUDAL ERA
The Maiden Tower  and The Palace of the Shirvanshahs  in Old Baku  is a UNESCO World Heritage Site built in the 11th–12th century.
The Iranian Sassanids  turned Caucasian Albania into a vassal state  in AD 252, while King Urnayr  officially adopted Christianity
as the state religion in the 4th century. Despite Sassanid rule, Albania remained an entity in the region until the 9th century,
while fully subordinate to Sassanid Iran, and retained its monarchy.[32]

In the first half of the 7th century AD, the Islamic Umayyad Caliphate  repulsed both the Sassanids and Byzantines from the
Caucasus and turned Caucasian Albania into a vassal state after Christian resistance, led by King Javanshir, was suppressed in 667
AD. Caucasian Albania however, had already come under nominal Muslim rule through the Muslim conquest of Iran, as it was part of
the Sassanid territory upon advent of the Muslim conquest. The power vacuum left by the decline of the Abbasid Caliphate  was
filled by numerous local dynasties such as the Sallarids, Sajids, Shaddadids, Rawadids  and Buyids. At the beginning of the 11th
century, the territory was gradually seized by waves of Turkic  Oghuz  tribes from Central Asia. The first of these Turkic
dynasties established was the Seljuqs, who entered the area now known as Azerbaijan by 1067.

The pre-Turkic population that lived on the territory of modern Azerbaijani Republic spoke several Indo-European and Caucasian
languages, among them Armenian[50][51]  [52][53][54]  and an Iranian language  called the Old Azari language, which was gradually
replaced by a Turkic language, the early precursor of the Azerbaijani language  of today.[55]  To distinguish it from the Turkic
Azerbaijani or Azeri language, this Iranian language, is designated as the Azari language (or Old Azari language), because the
Turkic language and people are also designated as "Azarbaijani" or "Azari" in the Persian language. However some linguists have
also designated the Tati dialects  of Iranian Azerbaijan  and the Republic of Azerbaijan, like those spoken by the Tats, as a
remnant of Azari.[56][57]  Locally, the possessions of the subsequent Seljuq Empire  were ruled by Atabegs, technically vassals of
the Seljuq sultans, but sometimes de facto  rulers themselves. Under the Seljuq Turks, local poets such as Nizami Ganjavi  and 
Khagani Shirvani  gave rise to a blossoming of Persian literature  on the territory of present-day Azerbaijan.

The next ruling state of the Jalayirids  was short-lived and fell as a conquest of Timur.

The local dynasty of the Shirvanshahs  became a vassal  state of Timur's Empire, and assisted him in his war with the ruler of the
 Golden Horde  Tokhtamysh. Following Timur's death, two independent and rival states emerged: Kara Koyunlu  and Ak Koyunlu. The
Shirvanshahs returned, maintaining a high degree of autonomy as local rulers and vassals from 861 until 1539. During their
conquest and persecution by the Iranian Safavids  in 1501, the last dynasty imposed Shia Islam  upon the formerly Sunni 
population,[58][59][60]  as it did over its territories in modern-day Iran, as it was battling against the Sunni Ottoman Empire.
[61]  This, in combination with another series of events, the Safavids laid the foundation for the fact that Iran and the
contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan are the only Shia-majority countries ever since.[62]  Despite efforts of the Safavids, the
Ottomans briefly managed to occupy swaths of present-day Azerbaijan twice over the centuries. Also, Baku and its environs were
briefly managed by the Russians in the early 18th century as a consequence of the Russo-Persian War. Despite these very brief
intermissions by Safavid Iran's neighboring rivals, the land of what is nowadays Azerbaijan remained under intermittent  Iranian 
rule from the earliest advent of the Safavids up to the course of the 19th century.

MODERN ERA
Main articles: Russo-Persian Wars, Treaty of Gulistan, and Treaty of TurkmenchaySee also: Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, 
Azerbaijan SSR, and Operation Edelweiss
Territories of the Northern and Southern Khanates (and Sultanates) in the 18th–19th centuries.[63]After the Safavids, the area was ruled by the Iranian dynasties of Afshar  and Zand  and briefly by the Qajars, until the latter
was eventually forced to cede it to the Russian Empire in the course of the 19th century. However, self-ruling khanates  with
various forms of independence[64][65][66][67][68]  emerged in the area, especially following the collapse of the Zand dynasty and
in the early Qajar era. These khanates, though often self-ruling, were vassals  and subjects  of the Iranian shah.[69]  The
khanates exercised control over their affairs via international trade routes between Central Asia and the West.[70]  From the late
18th century on, Imperial Russia switched to a more aggressive geo-political stance towards its two neighbors and rivals to the
south, namely Iran and Turkey.[71]  Following a chain of events that started with the re-subjugation of Georgia into Iran  in
1795, Russia would now actively contest and battle with the latter over possession of the Caucasus region which was, for the most
part, in the hands of Iran.[72]  The successful Russian campaigns in the later stages of the Russo-Persian War (1804–13)  were
concluded with the Treaty of Gulistan, in which the shah's claims to some of the Khanates of the Caucasus were dismissed by Russia
on the ground that they had been de facto  independent long before their Russian occupation.[73]

The siege of Ganja Fortress in 1804  during the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813)  by Russian forces under the leadership of General 
Pavel Tsitsianov.Following Qajar Iran's loss in the 1804–1813 war, it was forced to concede suzerainty over most of the khanates,
along with Georgia and Dagestan to the Russian Empire, per the Gulistan  treaty.[74]

The area to the north of the river Aras, amongst which territory lies the contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan, was Iranian
territory until it was occupied by Russia in the 19th century.[6][75][76][77][78][79]  Under the Treaty of Turkmenchay  which
ended the Russo-Persian War (1826-1828), Qajar Iran  was forced to recognize Russian sovereignty over the Erivan Khanate, the 
Nakhchivan Khanate  and the remainder of the Lankaran Khanate,[74]  comprising the last parts of the soil of the contemporary
Azerbaijani Republic that were still in Iranian hands. After incorporation of all Caucasian territories from Iran into Russia, the
new border between the two was set at the Aras River, which, upon the Soviet Union's disintegration, subsequently became part of
the border between Iran and the Azerbaijan Republic.

Qajar Iran was forced to cede its Caucasian territories to Russia in the 19th century, which thus included the territory of the
modern-day Azerbaijan Republic, while as a result of that cession, the Azerbaijani ethnic group  is nowadays parted between two
nations: Iran and Azerbaijan.[80]  Furthermore, the number of ethnic Azerbaijanis in Iran far outnumber those in neighbouring
Azerbaijan.

After the collapse of the Russian Empire during World War I, the short-lived Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic  was
declared, constituting what are the present-day republics of Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Armenia.

It was followed by the March Days  massacres[81][82][83]  that took place between 30 March and 2 April 1918 in the city of Baku 
and adjacent areas of the Baku Governorate  of the Russian Empire.[84]  When the republic dissolved in May 1918, the leading 
Musavat  party declared independence as the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  (ADR), adopting the name of "Azerbaijan" for the new
republic; a name that prior to the proclamation of the ADR was solely used to refer to the adjacent northwestern region of
contemporary Iran.[40][41][42]  The ADR was the first modern parliamentary republic  in the Muslim world.[6][85][86]  Among the
important accomplishments of the Parliament was the extension of suffrage to women, making Azerbaijan the first Muslim nation to
grant women equal political rights with men.[85]  Another important accomplishment of ADR was the establishment of Baku State
University, which was the first modern-type university founded in Muslim East.[85]

Map presented by delegation from Azerbaijan to Paris Peace Conference  in 1919.By March 1920, it was obvious that Soviet Russia
would attack Baku. Vladimir Lenin  said that the invasion was justified as Soviet Russia  could not survive without Baku's oil.
[87][88]  Independent Azerbaijan lasted only 23 months until the Bolshevik  11th Soviet Red Army  invaded it, establishing the 
Azerbaijan SSR  on 28 April 1920. Although the bulk of the newly formed Azerbaijani army was engaged in putting down an Armenian
revolt that had just broken out in Karabakh, Azerbaijanis did not surrender their brief independence of 1918–20 quickly or easily.
As many as 20,000 Azerbaijani soldiers died resisting what was effectively a Russian reconquest.[89]

On 13 October 1921, the Soviet republics of Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia signed an agreement with Turkey known as the 
Treaty of Kars. The previously independent Naxicivan SSR would also become an autonomous ASSR within the Azerbaijan SSR by the
treaty of Kars. On the other hand, Armenia was awarded the region of Zangezur  and Turkey agreed to return Gyumri  (then known as
Alexandropol).

During World War II, Azerbaijan played a crucial role in the strategic energy policy of the Soviet Union, with 80 percent of the
Soviet Union's oil on the Eastern Front  being supplied by Baku. By the Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR  in February
1942, the commitment of more than 500 workers and employees of the oil industry  of Azerbaijan were awarded orders and medals. 
Operation Edelweiss  carried out by the German Wehrmacht  targeted Baku because of its importance as the energy (petroleum) dynamo
of the USSR.[6]  A fifth of all Azerbaijanis fought in the Second World War from 1941 to 1945. Approximately 681,000 people with
over 100,000 of them women went to the front, while the total population of Azerbaijan was 3.4 million at the time.[90]  Some
250,000 people from Azerbaijan were killed on the front. More than 130 Azerbaijanis were named Heroes of the Soviet Union.
Azerbaijani Major-General Azi Aslanov  was twice awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union.[91]

REPUBLIC ERA
Red Army  paratroops  during the Black January  tragedy in 1990.Following the politics of glasnost, initiated by Mikhail Gorbachev, civil unrest and ethnic strife grew in various regions of the
Soviet Union, including Nagorno-Karabakh,[92]  an autonomous region of the Azerbaijan SSR. The disturbances in Azerbaijan, in
response to Moscow's indifference to already heated conflict, resulted in calls for independence and secession, which culminated
in Black January  in Baku.[93]  Later in 1990, the Supreme Council of the Azerbaijan SSR  dropped the words "Soviet Socialist"
from the title, adopted the Declaration of Sovereignty of the Azerbaijan Republic and restored flag of the Azerbaijan Democratic
Republic as the state flag.[94]  On 18 October 1991, the Supreme Council of Azerbaijan adopted a Declaration of Independence which
was affirmed by a nationwide referendum in December 1991, when the Soviet Union officially ceased to exist on 26 December 1991.
[94]

The early years of independence were overshadowed by the Nagorno-Karabakh war  with the ethnic Armenian majority of
Nagorno-Karabakh backed by Armenia.[95]  By the end of hostilities in 1994, Armenians controlled up to 14–16 percent of
Azerbaijani territory, including Nagorno-Karabakh itself.[96][97]  During the war many atrocities were committed including the 
massacre  at Malibeyli and Gushchular, the Garadaghly, Agdaban  and the Khojaly massacres.[98][99]  Furthermore, an estimated
30,000 people had been killed and more than a million people had been displaced.[100]  Four United Nations Security Council 
Resolutions (822, 853, 874, and 884) demand for "the immediate withdrawal of all Armenian forces from all occupied territories of
Azerbaijan."[101]  Many Russians and Armenians left Azerbaijan during the 1990s.[102]  According to the 1970 census, there were
510,000 ethnic Russians  and 484,000 Armenians in Azerbaijan.[103]

In 1993, democratically elected president Abulfaz Elchibey  was overthrown by a military insurrection led by Colonel Surat
Huseynov, which resulted in the rise to power of the former leader of Soviet Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev.[104]  In 1994, Surat
Huseynov, by that time a prime minister, attempted another military coup against Heydar Aliyev, but Huseynov was arrested and
charged with treason.[105]  A year later, in 1995, another coup  was attempted against Aliyev, this time by the commander of the 
OMON  special unit, Rovshan Javadov. The coup was averted, resulting in the killing of the latter and disbanding of Azerbaijan's
OMON units.[106][107]  At the same time, the country was tainted by rampant corruption in the governing bureaucracy.[108]  In
October 1998, Aliyev was reelected for a second term. Despite the much improved economy, particularly with the exploitations of 
Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli oil field  and Shah Deniz gas field, Aliyev's presidency was criticized due to suspected vote fraud and
corruption.[109]

Ilham Aliyev, the son of Heydar Aliyev, assumed as the chairmen of the New Azerbaijan Party  as well as the office of presidency
when his father died in 2003. He was reelected to a third term  as president in October 2013. He then launched a crackdown on
opposition elements. In November, he put two prominent opponents on trial for inciting riots ten months earlier: Ilgar Mammadov,
the chairman of the opposition Republican Alternative (REAL); and Ilgar Mammadov, the deputy chairman of the New Equality Party
(Musavat). In addition the dissident Islamic theologian Taleh Bagirzada was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. The opposition
newspaper Azadiq  was closed down. Three men were sentenced to life in prison on charges of plotting attacks in Baku in a
conspiracy with Iran.[110]

GEOGRAPHY
Azerbaijan map of Köppen climate classification.Main articles: Geography of Azerbaijan, Environment of Azerbaijan, State reserves
of Azerbaijan, and National parks of AzerbaijanSee also: Extreme points of AzerbaijanCaucasus Mountains  in northern Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan is in the South Caucasus  region of Eurasia, straddling Western Asia  and Eastern Europe. It lies between latitudes 38° 
 and 42° N, and longitudes 44°  and 51° E. The total length of Azerbaijan's land borders  is 2,648 km (1,645 mi), of which
1007 kilometers are with Armenia, 756 kilometers with Iran, 480 kilometers with Georgia, 390 kilometers with Russia and
15 kilometers with Turkey.[111]  The coastline  stretches for 800 km (497 mi), and the length of the widest area of the
Azerbaijani section of the Caspian Sea is 456 km (283 mi).[111]  The territory of Azerbaijan extends 400 km (249 mi) from north to
south, and 500 km (311 mi) from west to east.

Three physical features dominate Azerbaijan: the Caspian Sea, whose shoreline forms a natural boundary to the east; the Greater
Caucasus  mountain range to the north; and the extensive flatlands at the country's center. There are also three mountain ranges,
the Greater and Lesser Caucasus, and the Talysh Mountains, together covering approximately 40 percent of the country.[112]  The
highest peak of Azerbaijan is mount Bazardüzü  (4,466 m), while the lowest point lies in the Caspian Sea (−28 m). Nearly half of
all the mud volcanoes  on Earth are concentrated in Azerbaijan, these volcanoes  were also among nominees for the New7Wonders of
Nature.[113]

The main water sources are surface waters. However, only 24 of the 8,350 rivers are greater than 100 km (62 mi) in length.[112] 
All the rivers drain into the Caspian Sea in the east of the country.[112]  The largest lake is Sarysu  (67 km²), and the longest
river is Kur  (1,515 km), which is transboundary. Azerbaijan's four main islands in the Caspian Sea have a combined area of over
thirty square kilometers.

Since the independence of Azerbaijan in 1991, the Azerbaijani government  has taken drastic measures to preserve the environment
of Azerbaijan. But national protection of the environment started to truly improve after 2001 when the state budget increased due
to new revenues provided by the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline. Within four years protected areas doubled and now make up eight
percent of the country's territory. Since 2001 the government has set up seven large reserves and almost doubled the sector of the
budget earmarked for environmental protection.[114]

LANDSCAPE
Main articles: Orography of Azerbaijan, Climate of Azerbaijan, and Water bodies of AzerbaijanMount Bazarduzu, the highest peak of
Azerbaijan, as seen from Mount Shahdagh
The landscape of Khinalug valley.Azerbaijan is home to a vast variety of landscapes. Over half of Azerbaijan's land mass consists
of mountain ridges, crests, yailas, and plateaus which rise up to hypsometric levels of 400–1000 meters (including the Middle and
Lower lowlands), in some places (Talis, Jeyranchol-Ajinohur and Langabiz-Alat foreranges) up to 100–120 meters, and others from
0–50 meters and up (Qobustan, Absheron). The rest of Azerbaijan's terrain consist of plains and lowlands. Hypsometric marks within
the Caucasus region vary from about −28 meters at the Caspian Sea shoreline up to 4,466 meters (Bazardüzü peak).[115]

The formation of climate in Azerbaijan is influenced particularly by cold arctic  air masses  of Scandinavian anticyclone,
temperate of Siberian  anticyclone, and Central Asian anticyclone.[116]  Azerbaijan's diverse landscape affects the ways air
masses enter the country.[116]  The Greater Caucasus protects the country from direct influences of cold air masses coming from
the north. That leads to the formation of subtropical climate  on most foothills and plains of the country. Meanwhile, plains and
foothills are characterized by high solar radiation  rates.

Nine out of 11 existing climate zones  are present in Azerbaijan.[117]  Both the absolute minimum temperature ( −33 °C or −27.4 °F 
 ) and the absolute maximum temperature ( 46 °C or 114.8 °F  ) were observed in Julfa  and Ordubad.[117]  The maximum annual 
precipitation  falls in Lankaran  (1,600 to 1,800 mm or 63 to 71 in) and the minimum in Absheron (200 to 350 mm or 7.9 to
13.8 in).[117]

Murovdag  is the highest mountain range  in the Lesser Caucasus.Rivers and lakes form the principal part of the water systems of
Azerbaijan, they were formed over a long geological timeframe and changed significantly throughout that period. This is
particularly evidenced by remnants of ancient rivers found throughout the country. The country's water systems are continually
changing under the influence of natural forces and human introduced industrial activities. Artificial rivers (canals) and ponds
are a part of Azerbaijan's water systems. In terms of water supply, Azerbaijan is below the average in the world with
approximately 100,000 cubic metres (3,531,467 cubic feet) per year of water per square kilometer.[117]  All big water reservoirs 
are built on Kur. The hydrography of Azerbaijan basically belongs to the Caspian Sea basin.

There are 8,350 rivers of various lengths within Azerbaijan. Only 24 rivers are over 100 kilometers long.[118]  The Kura  and Aras 
 are the most popular rivers in Azerbaijan, they run through the Kura-Aras Lowland. The rivers that directly flow into the Caspian
Sea, originate mainly from the north-eastern slope of the Major Caucasus and Talysh Mountains  and run along the Samur–Devechi and
Lankaran lowlands.

Yanar Dag, translated as "burning mountain", is a natural gas fire which blazes continuously on a hillside on the Absheron
Peninsula  on the Caspian Sea  near Baku, which itself is known as the "land of fire." Flames jet out into the air from a thin,
porous sandstone layer. It is a tourist attraction to visitors to the Baku area.

BIODIVERSITY
Main article: Wildlife of AzerbaijanFurther information: Fauna of Azerbaijan  and Flora of Azerbaijan
The Karabakh horse  is the national animal of Azerbaijan.The first reports on the richness and diversity of animal life in
Azerbaijan can be found in travel notes of Eastern travelers. Animal carvings on architectural monuments, ancient rocks and stones
survived up to the present times. The first information on the animal kingdom of Azerbaijan was collected during the visits of
naturalists to Azerbaijan in the 17th century.[112]  Unlike fauna, the concept of animal kingdom covers not only the types of
animals, but also the number of individual species.

There are 106 species of mammals, 97 species of fish, 363 species of birds, 10 species of amphibians and 52 species of reptiles
which have been recorded and classified in Azerbaijan.[112]  The national animal of Azerbaijan is the Karabakh horse, a
mountain-steppe racing and riding horse endemic to Azerbaijan. The Karabakh horse has a reputation for its good temper, speed,
elegance and intelligence. It is one of the oldest breeds, with ancestry dating to the ancient world. However today the horse is
an endangered species.[119]

Azerbaijan's flora consists of more than 4,500 species of higher plants. Due to the unique climate in Azerbaijan, the flora is
much richer in the number of species than the flora of the other republics of the South Caucasus.[120]  About 67 percent of the
species growing in the whole Caucasus  can be found in Azerbaijan.

POLITICS
Main article: Politics of AzerbaijanSee also: Elections in Azerbaijan  and Human rights in Azerbaijan
The son of former President Heydar Aliyev, Ilham Aliyev  succeeded his father and has remained in power since 2003.The structural
formation of Azerbaijan's political system was completed by the adoption of the new Constitution  on 12 November 1995. According
to the Article 23 of Constitution, the state symbols  of the Azerbaijan Republic are the flag, the coat of arms  and the national
anthem. The state power in Azerbaijan is limited only by law for internal issues, but for international affairs is additionally
limited by the provisions of international agreements.

The government of Azerbaijan is based on the separation of powers  among the legislative, executive and judicial  branches. The
legislative power is held by the unicameral  National Assembly  and the Supreme National Assembly in the Nakhchivan Autonomous
Republic. Parliamentary elections are held every five years, on the first Sunday of November. The Yeni Azerbaijan Party, and
independents loyal to the ruling government, currently hold almost all of the Parliament's 125 seats. During the 2010
Parliamentary election, the opposition parties, Musavat  and Azerbaijani Popular Front Party, failed to win a single seat.
European observers found numerous irregularities  in the run-up to the election and on election day.[121]

The executive power is held by the president, who is elected for a five-year term by direct elections, and the Prime Minister of
Azerbaijan. The president is authorized to form the Cabinet, a collective executive body, accountable to both the President and
the National Assembly. The Cabinet of Azerbaijan consists primarily of the Prime Minister, his Deputies and Ministers. The
president does not have the right to dissolve the National Assembly, but he has the right to veto its decisions. To override the
presidential veto, the parliament must have a majority of 95 votes. The judicial power is vested in the Constitutional Court, 
Supreme Court  and the Economic Court. The President nominates the judges in these courts.

The Security Council is the deliberative body under the president, and he organizes it according to the Constitution. It was
established on 10 April 1997. The administrative department is not a part of the president's office but manages the financial,
technical and pecuniary activities of both the president and his office.

Although Azerbaijan has held several elections since regaining its independence and it has many of the formal institutions of
democracy, it remains classified as "not free" (on border with "partly free") by Freedom House.[122][123]  In recent years, large
numbers of Azerbaijani journalists, bloggers, lawyers, human rights activists have been rounded up and jailed for their criticism
of President Aliyev and government authorities.[124]  A resolution adopted by the European Parliament in September 2015 described
Azerbaijan as "having suffered the greatest decline in democratic governance in all of Eurasia over the past ten years," noting as
well that its dialogue with the country on human rights has "not made any substantial progress."[125]

Azerbaijan has been harshly criticized for bribing foreign officials and diplomats for promoting its causes abroad and
legitimizing its elections at home, a practice which has been termed as 'caviar diplomacy'.[126][127][128][129]

FOREIGN RELATIONS
Main article: Foreign relations of AzerbaijanSee also: Azerbaijan and the European UnionVladimir Putin  in Azerbaijan in August
2013The short-lived Azerbaijan Democratic Republic succeeded in establishing diplomatic relations with six countries, sending
diplomatic representatives to Germany and Finland.[130]  The process of international recognition of Azerbaijan's independence
from the collapsing Soviet Union lasted roughly one year. The most recent country to recognize Azerbaijan was Bahrain, on 6
November 1996.[131]  Full diplomatic relations, including mutual exchanges of missions, were first established with Turkey,
Pakistan, the United States, Iran[130]  and Israel.[132]  Azerbaijan has placed a particular emphasis on its "Special Relationship
" with Turkey.[133][134]

Azerbaijan has diplomatic relations with 158 countries so far and holds membership in 38 international organizations.[14]  It
holds observer status in the Non-Aligned Movement  and World Trade Organization  and is a correspondent at the International
Telecommunication Union.[14]  On 9 May 2006 Azerbaijan was elected to membership in the newly established Human Rights Council  by
the United Nations General Assembly. The term of office began on 19 June 2006.[16]

Ilham Aliyev  attends the Caspian Sea Summit in Astrakhan, Russia, 29 September 2014Foreign policy priorities of Azerbaijan
include, first of all, the restoration of its territorial integrity; elimination of the consequences of the loss of
Nagorno-Karabakh and seven other regions of Azerbaijan;[135][136]  integration into European and Euro-Atlantic structure;
contribution to international security; cooperation with international organizations; regional cooperation and bilateral
relations; strengthening of defense capability; promotion of security by domestic policy means; strengthening of democracy;
preservation of the ethnic and religious tolerance; scientific, educational, and cultural policy and preservation of moral values;
economic and social development; enhancing internal and border security; and migration, energy, and transportation security
policy.[135]

The Azerbaijani government, in late 2007, stated that the long-standing dispute over the Armenian-occupied territory of
Nagorno-Karabakh is almost certain to spark a new war if it remains unresolved.[135]  The Government is in the process of
increasing its military budget. Furthermore, an attack by the Azerbaijani military in 2016 on Armenian villages in
Nagorno-Karabakh has caused physical damage and raised controversy over the future of peaceful relations between Azerbaijan and
its neighbor, Armenia.[137]

Azerbaijan is an active member of international coalitions fighting international terrorism. The country is contributing to
peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq. Azerbaijan is an active member of NATO's Partnership for Peace  program. It
also maintains good relations with the European Union  and could potentially one day apply for membership.[135]

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
Main article: Administrative divisions of AzerbaijanAzerbaijan is divided into 10 economic regions; 66 rayons  (rayonlar, singular rayon) and 77 cities (şəhərlər, singular şəhər) of
which 12 are under the direct authority of the republic.[138]  Moreover, Azerbaijan includes the Autonomous Republic  (muxtar
respublika) of Nakhchivan.[96]  The President of Azerbaijan  appoints the governors of these units, while the government of
Nakhchivan is elected and approved by the parliament of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.

Absheron Economic Region * Absheron  (Abşeron)
 * Khizi  (Xızı)
 * Baku  (Bakı)
 * Sumqayit  (Sumqayıt)

Aran Economic Region * Aghjabadi  (Ağcabədi)
 * Aghdash  (Ağdaş)
 * Barda  (Bərdə)
 * Beylagan  (Beyləqan)
 * Bilasuvar  (Biləsuvar)
 * Goychay  (Göyçay)
 * Hajigabul  (Hacıqabul)
 * Imishli  (İmişli)
 * Kurdamir  (Kürdəmir)
 * Neftchala  (Neftçala)
 * Saatly  (Saatlı)
 * Sabirabad  (Sabirabad)
 * Salyan  (Salyan)
 * Ujar  (Ucar)
 * Yevlakh  (Yevlax)
 * Zardab  (Zərdab)
 * Mingachevir  (Mingəçevir)
 * Shirvan  (Şirvan)
 * Yevlakh  (Yevlax)

Daghlig Shirvan * Aghsu  (Ağsu)
 * Gobustan  (Qobustan)
 * Ismailly  (İsmayıllı)
 * Shamakhy  (Şamaxı)

Ganja-Gazakh * Aghstafa  (Ağstafa)
 * Dashkasan  (Daşkəsən)
 * Gadabay  (Gədəbəy)
 * Gazakh  (Qazax)
 * Goygol  (Göygöl)
 * Goranboy  (Goranboy)
 * Samukh  (Samux)
 * Shamkir  (Şəmkir)
 * Tovuz  (Tovuz)
 * Ganja  (Gəncə)
 * Naftalan  (Naftalan)

Guba-Khachmaz * Guba  (Quba)
 * Gusar  (Qusar)
 * Khachmaz  (Xaçmaz)
 * Shabran  (Şabran)
 * Siyazan  (Siyəzən)

Kalbajar-Lachin * Gubadly  (Qubadlı)
 * Kalbajar  (Kəlbəcər)
 * Lachin  (Laçın)
 * Zangilan  (Zəngilan)

Lankaran * Astara  (Astara)
 * Jalilabad  (Cəlilabad)
 * Lankaran  (Lənkəran)
 * Lerik  (Lerik)
 * Masally  (Masallı)

 * Yardimly  (Yardımlı)
 * Lankaran  (Lənkəran)

Nakhchivan * Babek  (Babək)
 * Julfa  (Culfa)
 * Kangarli  (Kəngərli)
 * Ordubad  (Ordubad)
 * Sadarak  (Sədərək)
 * Shahbuz  (Şahbuz)
 * Sharur  (Şərur)
 * Nakhchivan  (Naxçıvan)

Shaki-Zaqatala * Balakan  (Balakən)
 * Gabala  (Qəbələ)
 * Gakh  (Qax)
 * Oghuz  (Oğuz)
 * Shaki  (Şəki)
 * Zaqatala  (Zaqatala)
 * Shaki  (Şəki)

Yukhari Garabakh * Aghdam  (Ağdam)
 * Fuzuli  (Füzuli)
 * Jabrayil  (Cəbrayıl)
 * Khojaly  (Xocalı)
 * Khojavend  (Xocavənd)
 * Shusha  (Şuşa)
 * Tartar  (Tərtər)
 * Khankendi  (Xankəndi)
 * Shusha  (Şuşa)

Azerbaijan is divided into 10 economic regionsNote: The cities under the direct authority of the republic in italics.

MILITARY
Main article: Azerbaijani Armed ForcesAzerbaijani Navy  fleet during the 2011 military parade in Baku.
Azerbaijani Special Forces during military parade.The history of the modern Azerbaijan army dates back to Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  in 1918, when the National Army of the
newly formed Azerbaijan Democratic Republic was created on 26 June 1918.[139][140]  When Azerbaijan gained independence after the 
dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Armed Forces of the Republic of Azerbaijan were created according to the Law on the Armed
Forces of 9 October 1991.[141]  The original date of the establishment of the short-lived National Army is celebrated as Army Day
(26 June) in today's Azerbaijan.[142]  As of 2002, Azerbaijan had 95,000 active personnel in its armed forces. There are also
17,000 paramilitary troops.[143]  The armed forces have three branches: the Land Forces, the Air Forces  and the Navy.
Additionally the armed forces embrace several military sub-groups that can be involved in state defense when needed. These are the
 Internal Troops  of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the State Border Service, which includes the Coast Guard  as well.[96] 
The Azerbaijan National Guard  is a further paramilitary force. It operates as a semi-independent entity of the Special State
Protection Service, an agency subordinate to the President.[144]

Contingent from the Azerbaijani military during the Moscow Victory Day Parade, 9 May 2015Azerbaijan adheres to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe  and has signed all major international arms and weapons
treaties. Azerbaijan closely cooperates with NATO  in programs such as Partnership for Peace  and Individual Partnership Action
Plan. Azerbaijan has deployed 151 of its Peacekeeping Forces in Iraq and another 184 in Afghanistan.[145]

The defense budget of Azerbaijan for 2011 was set at US$3.1 billion.[146]  In addition to that, $1.36 billion was planned to be
used for the needs of the defense industry, which bring up the total military spending to billion.[146][147]  Azerbaijani
President Ilham Aliyev said on 26 June 2011 that the defence spending reached $3.3 billion that year.[148]

Azerbaijan's defense budget for 2013 is $3.7 billion.[149][150]

Azerbaijani defense industry manufactures small arms, artillery systems, tanks, armors and noctovision devices, aviation bombs,
pilotless vehicles, various military vehicles and military planes and helicopters.[151][152][153][154]

ECONOMY
Main article: Economy of AzerbaijanAfter gaining independence in 1991, Azerbaijan became a member of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Islamic Development Bank  and the Asian Development Bank.[155]  The banking system of
Azerbaijan consists of the Central Bank of Azerbaijan, commercial banks  and non-banking credit organizations. The National (now
Central) Bank was created in 1992 based on the Azerbaijan State Savings Bank, an affiliate of the former State Savings Bank of the
USSR. The Central Bank serves as Azerbaijan's central bank, empowered to issue the national currency, the Azerbaijani manat, and
to supervise all commercial banks. Two major commercial banks are UniBank  and the state-owned International Bank of Azerbaijan,
run by Dr. Jahangir Hajiyev.

Pushed up by spending and demand growth, the 2007 Q1  inflation rate reached 16.6%.[156]  Nominal incomes and monthly wages
climbed 29% and 25% respectively against this figure, but price increases in non-oil industry encouraged inflation.[156] 
Azerbaijan shows some signs of the so-called "Dutch disease" because of its fast-growing energy sector, which causes inflation and
makes non-energy exports more expensive.

In the early 2000s the chronically high inflation was brought under control. This led to the launch of a new currency, the new
Azerbaijani manat, on 1 January 2006, to cement the economic reforms and erase the vestiges of an unstable economy.[157][158]

In 2008, Azerbaijan was cited as one of the top 10 reformers by the World Bank's Doing Business Report.[159]

Azerbaijan led the world as the top reformer in 2007/08, with improvements on seven out of 10 indicators of regulatory reform.
Azerbaijan started operating a one-stop shop in January 2008 that halved the time, cost and number of procedures to start a
business. Business registrations increased by 40% in the first six months. Azerbaijan also eliminated the minimum loan cutoff of
$1,100, more than doubling the number of borrowers covered by the credit registry. Also, taxpayers can now file forms and pay
their taxes online. Azerbaijan's extensive reforms moved it far up the ranks, from 97 to 33 in the overall ease of doing business.

Azerbaijan is also ranked 57th in the Global Competitiveness Report  for 2010–2011, above other CIS countries.[160]  By 2012 the 
GDP  of Azerbaijan had increased 20-fold from to its 1995 level.[161]

ENERGY
Main article: Energy in AzerbaijanFurther information: Petroleum industry in Azerbaijan
A pumping unit  for the mechanical extraction of oil on the outskirts of Baku.Two-thirds of Azerbaijan is rich in oil and natural
gas.[162]  The region of the Lesser Caucasus  accounts for most of the country's gold, silver, iron, copper, titanium, chromium, 
manganese, cobalt, molybdenum, complex ore  and antimony.[162]  In September 1994, a 30-year contract was signed between the 
State
Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic  (SOCAR) and 13 oil companies, among them Amoco, BP, ExxonMobil, Lukoil  and Statoil.[155]  As
Western oil companies are able to tap deepwater oilfields  untouched by the Soviet exploitation, Azerbaijan is considered one of
the most important spots in the world for oil exploration  and development.[163]  Meanwhile, the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan  was
established as an extra-budgetary fund to ensure macroeconomic  stability, transparency in the management of oil revenue, and
safeguarding of resources for future generations.

Azeriqaz, a sub-company of SOCAR, intends to ensure full gasification of the country by 2021.[164]

AGRICULTURE
Main article: Agriculture in AzerbaijanAzerbaijan has the largest agricultural basin in the region. About 54.9 percent of
Azerbaijan is agricultural land.[111]  At the beginning of 2007 there were 4,755,100 hectares of utilized agricultural area.[165] 
In the same year the total wood resources counted 136 million m³.[165]  Azerbaijan's agricultural scientific research institutes
are focused on meadows and pastures, horticulture and subtropical  crops, green vegetables, viticulture  and wine-making, cotton
growing and medicinal plants.[166]  In some areas it is profitable to grow grain, potatoes, sugar beets, cotton[167]  and tobacco.
Livestock, dairy products, and wine and spirits  are also important farm products. The Caspian fishing industry  concentrates on
the dwindling stocks of sturgeon  and beluga. In 2002 the Azerbaijani merchant marine  had 54 ships.[168]

Some products previously imported from abroad have begun to be produced locally. Among them are Coca Cola by Coca Cola Bottlers
LTD, beer by Baki-Kastel, parquet by Nehir and oil pipes by EUPEC Pipe Coating Azerbaijan.[169]

TOURISM
Main article: Tourism in AzerbaijanShahdag Mountain Resort  is the country's largest winter resort.Tourism is an important part of
the economy of Azerbaijan. The country was a well-known tourist spot in the 1980s. However, the fall of the Soviet Union, and the
Nagorno-Karabakh War during the 1990s, damaged the tourist industry and the image of Azerbaijan as a tourist destination.[170]

It was not until the 2000s that the tourism industry began to recover, and the country has since experienced a high rate of growth
in the number of tourist visits and overnight stays.[171]  In the recent years, Azerbaijan has also becoming a popular destination
for religious, spa, and health care tourism.[172]  During winter, the Shahdag Mountain Resort  offers skiing with state of the art
facilities.

The government of Azerbaijan  has set the development of Azerbaijan as an elite tourist destination as a top priority. It is a
national strategy to make tourism a major, if not the single largest, contributor to the Azerbaijani economy.[173]  These
activities are regulated by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Azerbaijan.

TRANSPORTATION
Main articles: Transportation in Azerbaijan  and Rail transport in AzerbaijanThe convenient location of Azerbaijan on the
crossroad of major international traffic arteries, such as the Silk Road  and the south–north corridor, highlights the strategic
importance of transportation sector for the country's economy.[174]  The transport sector in the country includes roads, railways,
aviation, and maritime transport.

Azerbaijan is also an important economic hub in the transportation of raw materials. The Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan pipeline  (BTC)
became operational in May 2006 and extends more than 1,774 kilometers through the territories of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey.
The BTC is designed to transport up to 50 million tons of crude oil annually and carries oil from the Caspian Sea oilfields to
global markets.[175]  The South Caucasus Pipeline, also stretching through the territory of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey, became
operational at the end of 2006 and offers additional gas supplies to the European market from the Shah Deniz gas field. Shah Deniz
is expected to produce up to 296 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year.[176]  Azerbaijan also plays a major role in the
EU-sponsored Silk Road Project.

In 2002, the Azerbaijani government established the Ministry of Transport with a broad range of policy and regulatory functions.
In the same year, the country became a member of the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic.[177]  The highest priority being;
upgrading the transport network and transforming transportation services into one of the key comparative advantages of the
country, as this would be highly conducive to the development of other sectors of the economy.

In 2012, the construction of Kars–Tbilisi–Baku railway  expected to provide transportation between Asia and Europe through
connecting the railways of China and Kazakhstan in the east with Turkey's Marmaray  to the European railway system in the west. 
Broad-gauge  railways in 2010 stretched for 2,918 km (1,813 mi) and electrified railways numbered 1,278 km (794 mi). By 2010,
there were 35 airports and one heliport.[96]

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Main articles: Communications in Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan National Aerospace Agency, and List of Azerbaijani inventions and
discoveriesShamakhi Astrophysical ObservatoryIn the 21st century, a new oil and gas boom helped to improve the situation in
Azerbaijan's science and technology sectors, and the government launched a campaign aimed at modernization and innovation. The
government estimates that profits from the information technology and communication industry will grow and become comparable with
those from oil production.[178]

Azerbaijan has a large and steadily growing Internet sector, mostly uninfluenced by the global financial crisis; rapid growth is
forecast for at least five more years.[179]

The country has also been making progress in developing its telecoms sector. The Ministry of Communications & Information
Technologies (MCIT), as well as being an operator through its role in Aztelekom, is both a policy-maker and regulator. Public pay
phones are available for local calls and require the purchase of a token from the telephone exchange or some shops and kiosks.
Tokens allow a call of indefinite duration. As of 2009[update], there were 1,397,000 main telephone lines[180]  and 1,485,000
internet users.[181]  There are four GSM  providers: Azercell, Bakcell, Azerfon (Nar Mobile), Nakhtel  mobile network operators
and one CDMA.

In the 21st century a number of prominent Azerbaijani geodynamics  and geotectonics  scientists, inspired by the fundamental works
of Elchin Khalilov  and others, designed hundreds of earthquake prediction stations and earthquake-resistant buildings that now
constitute the bulk of The Republican Center of Seismic Service.[182][183][184]

The Azerbaijan National Aerospace Agency  launched its first satellite AzerSat 1  into orbit on 7 February 2013 from Guiana Space
Centre  in French Guiana at orbital positions 46° East.[185][186][187]  The satellite will cover Europe and significant part of
Asian countries and Africa and will have transmission for TV, radio broadcasting and the internet.[188]  The launch of its own
satellite on orbit is Azerbaijan's first action in realizing prospective projects to turn itself into a country with a space
industry.[189][190]

DEMOGRAPHICS
Main article: Demographics of AzerbaijanFurther information: Ethnic minorities in AzerbaijanEthnic composition (2009)[191]
Azerbaijani91.60%Lezgian2.02%Armenian1.35%Russian1.34%Talysh1.26%Other nations2.43%From the total population of 9,165,000 people
as of July 2011, nearly 52% was urban population, the remaining 48% was the rural population.[192]  51% of the total population
were female.[192]  The sex ratio  for total population in that year was therefore 0.97 males per female.[96]

The 2011 population growth-rate was 0.85%, compared to 1.09% worldwide.[96]  A significant factor restricting the population
growth is rather a high level of migration. In 2011 Azerbaijan saw migration of −1.14/1,000 people.[96]

The Azerbaijani diaspora  is found in 42 countries[193]  and in turn there are many centers for ethnic minorities inside
Azerbaijan, including the German cultural society "Karelhaus", Slavic  cultural center, Azerbaijani-Israeli community, Kurdish 
cultural center, International Talysh  Association, Lezgin  national center "Samur", Azerbaijani-Tatar  community, Crimean Tatars 
society, etc.[194]

The ethnic composition of the population according to the 2009 population census: 91.60% Azerbaijanis, 2.02% Lezgians, 1.35% 
Armenians  (almost all Armenians live in the break-away region of Nagorno-Karabakh), 1.34% Russians, 1.26% Talysh, 0.56% Avars,
0.43% Turks, 0.29% Tatars, 0.28% Tats, 0.24% Ukrainians, 0.14% Tsakhurs, 0.11% Georgians, 0.10% Jews, 0.07% Kurds, other 0.21%.

Iranian Azerbaijanis  are by far the largest minority in Iran. The number of ethnic Azerbaijanis in Iran furthermore far outnumber
those in neighboring Azerbaijan. The CIA World Factbook estimates Iranian Azerbaijanis as comprising at least 16% of Iran's
population.[195]

URBANIZATION
Main article: List of cities in AzerbaijanIn total, Azerbaijan has 77 cities, 64 smaller rayon-class cities, and one special legal status city. These are followed by 257
urban-type settlements and 4,620 villages.[196]

LANGUAGE
Main article: Languages of AzerbaijanThe official language is Azerbaijani, which is spoken by approximately 92% of the population as a mother tongue.[197]  It belongs
to the Turkic  language family. Russian and Armenian  are also spoken, and each are the mother tongue of around 1.5% of the
population respectively.[197]  Russian and English play significant roles as second or third languages of education and
communication.[citation needed]  There are a dozen other minority languages spoken natively in the country.[198]  Avar, Budukh,
[199]  Georgian, Juhuri,[199]  Khinalug,[199]  Kryts,[199]  Lezgian, Rutul,[199]  Talysh, Tat,[199]  Tsakhur,[199]  and Udi[199] 
are all spoken by small minorities. Some of these language communities are very small and their numbers are decreasing.[200] 
Armenian is almost exclusively spoken in the break-away Nagorno-Karabakh region.

RELIGION
Religions in Azerbaijan[201]Islam97.4%Christianity1.1%None1.0%Others0.5%Main articles: Religion in Azerbaijan  and Freedom of
religion in Azerbaijan
The Bibi-Heybat Mosque  before its destruction by the Bolsheviks  in 1936. The mosque was built over the tomb of a descendant of 
Muhammad.[202]Around 98% of the population are Muslims.[203]  92% of the Muslims are Shia Muslims  and 8% Sunni Muslims,[204]  and the Republic
of Azerbaijan has the second highest Shia population percentage in the world.[205]  Other faiths are practised by the country's
various ethnic groups. Under article 48 of its Constitution, Azerbaijan is a secular state  and ensures religious freedom. In a
2006–2008 Gallup  poll, only 21% of respondents from Azerbaijan stated that religion is an important part of their daily lives.
This makes Azerbaijan the least religious Muslim-majority country in the world[206]

Of the nation's religious minorities, Christians who estimated 280,000 (3.1%)[207]  are mostly Russian  and Georgian  Orthodox 
and Armenian Apostolic  (almost all Armenians live in the break-away region of Nagorno-Karabakh).[96]  In 2003, there were 250 
Roman Catholics.[208]  Other Christian denominations as of 2002 include Lutherans, Baptists  and Molokans.[209]  There is also a
small Protestant  community.[210][211]  Azerbaijan also has an ancient Jewish  population with a 2,500-year history; Jewish
organizations estimate that 10,000–20,000 Jews remain in Azerbaijan.[212][213][214][215]  Azerbaijan also is home to members of
the Bahá'í, Hare Krishna  and Jehovah's Witnesses  communities, as well as adherents of the other religious communities.[209] 
Some religious communities have been unofficially restricted from religious freedom. A U.S. State Department  report on the matter
mentions detention of members of certain Muslim and Christian groups, and many groups have difficulty registering with the SCWRA.
[216]

EDUCATION
Main article: Education in Azerbaijan
Classroom in Dunya SchoolA relatively high percentage of Azerbaijanis have obtained some form of higher education, most notably in
scientific and technical subjects.[217]  In the Soviet era, literacy and average education levels rose dramatically from their
very low starting point, despite two changes in the standard alphabet, from Perso-Arabic script  to Latin  in the 1920s and from
Roman to Cyrillic  in the 1930s. According to Soviet data, 100 percent of males and females (ages nine to forty-nine) were
literate in 1970.[217]  According to the United Nations Development Program  Report 2009, the literacy rate in Azerbaijan is 99.5
percent.[218]

Since independence, one of the first laws that Azerbaijan's Parliament passed to disassociate itself from the Soviet Union was to
adopt a modified-Latin alphabet  to replace Cyrillic.[219]  Other than that the Azerbaijani system has undergone little structural
change. Initial alterations have included the reestablishment of religious education (banned during the Soviet period) and
curriculum changes that have reemphasized the use of the Azerbaijani language and have eliminated ideological content. In addition
to elementary schools, the education institutions include thousands of preschools, general secondary schools, and vocational
schools, including specialized secondary schools and technical schools. Education through the eighth grade is compulsory.

CULTURE
The Azerbaijani carpet  and Kalaghai, a UNESCO  Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage of Humanity.Main articles: Culture of
Azerbaijan  and Literature of AzerbaijanThe culture of Azerbaijan has developed as a result of many influences. Today, national
traditions are well preserved in the country despite Western influences, including globalized  on consumer culture. Some of the
main elements of the Azerbaijani culture are: music, literature, folk dances and art, cuisine, architecture, cinematography and 
Novruz Bayram. The latter is derived from the traditional celebration of the New Year in the ancient Iranian religion of 
Zoroastrianism. Novruz is a family holiday.[220]

Azerbaijan folk consists of Azerbaijanis, the representative part of society, as well as of nations and ethnic groups, compactly
living in various areas of the country. Azerbaijani national and traditional dresses are the Chokha  and Papakhi. There are radio
broadcasts in Russian, Armenian, Georgian, Kurdish, Lezgian  and Talysh  languages, which are financed from the state budget.[194] 
 Some local radio stations in Balakan  and Khachmaz  organize broadcasts in Avar  and Tat.[194]  In Baku several newspapers are
published in Russian, Kurdish (Dengi Kurd), Lezgian (Samur) and Talysh languages.[194]  Jewish society "Sokhnut" publishes the
newspaper Aziz.[194]

MUSIC AND FOLK DANCES
Main articles: Music of Azerbaijan  and Azerbaijani dancesUzeyir Hajibeyov  merged traditional Azerbaijani music  with Western
styles in the early 20th century.Music of Azerbaijan builds on folk traditions  that reach back nearly a thousand years.[221]  For centuries Azerbaijani music has
evolved under the badge of monody, producing rhythmically diverse melodies.[222]  Azerbaijani music has a branchy mode  system,
where chromatization  of major and minor  scales  is of great importance.[222]  Among national musical instruments there are 14 
string instruments, eight percussion instruments and six wind instruments.[223]  According to The Grove Dictionary of Music and
Musicians, "in terms of ethnicity, culture and religion the Azerbaijani are musically much closer to Iran than Turkey."[224]

The Azerbaijani Mugam, a UNESCO  Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage of Humanity, 16th-century miniature of Nizami Ganjavi's 
Khosrow and Shirin  tragic romance.Mugham, meykhana  and ashiq art  are among the many musical traditions of Azerbaijan. Mugham is usually a suite with poetry and
instrumental interludes. When performing mugham, the singers have to transform their emotions into singing and music. In contrast
to the mugham traditions of Central Asian countries, Azerbaijani mugham is more free-form and less rigid; it is often compared to
the improvised field of jazz.[225]  UNESCO  proclaimed the Azerbaijani mugham tradition a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible
Heritage of Humanity  on 7 November 2003. Meykhana is a kind of traditional Azerbaijani distinctive folk unaccompanied song,
usually performed by several people improvising on a particular subject.

Ashiq combines poetry, storytelling, dance and vocal and instrumental music into a traditional performance art that stands as a
symbol of Azerbaijani culture. It is a mystic troubadour or traveling bard who sings and plays the saz. This tradition has its
origin in the Shamanistic  beliefs of ancient Turkic peoples.[226]  Ashiqs' songs are semi-improvised around common bases.
Azerbaijan's ashiq art was included in the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage  by the UNESCO on 30 September 2009.[227]

Since the mid-1960s, Western-influenced Azerbaijani pop music, in its various forms, that has been growing in popularity in
Azerbaijan, while genres as rock  and hip hop  of alternative music genres are encouraged. Azerbaijani pop and Azerbaijani folk
music  arose with the international popularity of performers like Alim Qasimov, Rashid Behbudov, Vagif Mustafazadeh, Muslim
Magomayev, Shovkat Alakbarova  and Rubaba Muradova.[228]  Azerbaijan is an enthusiastic participant in the Eurovision Song
Contest. Azerbaijan made its debut appearance at the 2008 Eurovision Song Contest. The country's entry  gained the third place in
2009 and fifth the following year.[229]  Ell and Nikki  won the first place at the Eurovision Song Contest 2011  with the song "
Running Scared", entitling Azerbaijan to host the contest in 2012, in Baku.[230][231]  They have never missed a Grand Final.

There are dozens of Azerbaijani folk dances. They are performed at formal celebrations and the dancers wear national clothes like
the Chokha, which is well-preserved within the national dances. Most dances have a very fast rhythm. The national dance shows the
characteristics of the Azerbaijani nation.

LITERATURE
Main article: Azerbaijani literature
Painting of Khurshidbanu Natavan, one of the most distinguished Azerbaijani poets. She was also the daughter of the last ruler of
the Karabakh Khanate.Among the medieval authors born within the territorial limits of modern Azerbaijani Republic was Persian poet
and philosopher Nizami, called Ganjavi after his place of birth, Ganja, who was the author of the Khamseh  ("The Quintuplet"),
composed of five romantic poems, including "The Treasure of Mysteries," "Khosrow and Shīrīn," and "Leyli and Mejnūn."[232]

The earliest known figure in Azerbaijani literature was Izzeddin Hasanoglu, who composed a divan  consisting of Persian and Turkic
 ghazals.[233][234]  In Persian ghazals he used his pen-name, while his Turkic ghazals were composed under his own name of
Hasanoghlu.[233]

Classical literature in Azerbaijani was formed in 14th century based on the various dialect Early Middle Ages dialects of Tabriz 
and Shirvan. Among the poets of this period were Gazi Burhanaddin, Haqiqi  (pen-name of Jahan-shah Qara Qoyunlu), and Habibi.[235] 
 The end of the 14th century was also the period of starting literary activity of Imadaddin Nesimi,[236]  one of the greatest 
Turkic[237][238][239]  Hurufi  mystical poets of the late 14th and early 15th centuries[240]  and one of the most prominent early
divan masters in Turkic literary history,[240]  who also composed poetry in Persian[238][241]  and Arabic.[240]  The divan and
ghazal styles were further developed by poets Qasim al-Anvar, Fuzuli  and Khatai  (pen-name of Safavid  Shah Ismail I).

The Book of Dede Korkut  consists of two manuscripts copied in the 16th century,[242]  was not written earlier than the 15th
century.[243][244]  It is a collection of 12 stories reflecting the oral tradition of Oghuz nomads.[244]  The 16th-century poet,
Muhammed Fuzuli produced his timeless philosophical and lyrical Qazals  in Arabic, Persian, and Azerbaijani. Benefiting immensely
from the fine literary traditions of his environment, and building upon the legacy of his predecessors, Fizuli was destined to
become the leading literary figure of his society. His major works include The Divan of Ghazals  and The Qasidas. In the same
century, Azerbaijani literature further flourished with the development of Ashik  (Azerbaijani: Aşıq) poetic genre of bards.
During the same period, under the pen-name of Khatāī (Arabic: خطائی‎‎ for sinner) Shah Ismail I wrote about 1400 verses in
Azerbaijani,[245]  which were later published as his Divan. A unique literary style known as qoshma  (Azerbaijani: qoşma  for 
improvization) was introduced in this period, and developed by Shah Ismail and later by his son and successor, Shah Tahmasp I.

In the span of the 17th and 18th centuries, Fizuli's unique genres as well Ashik  poetry were taken up by prominent poets and
writers such as Qovsi of Tabriz, Shah Abbas Sani, Agha Mesih Shirvani, Nishat, Molla Vali Vidadi, Molla Panah Vagif, Amani, Zafar 
and others. Along with Turks, Turkmens  and Uzbeks, Azerbaijanis  also celebrate the Epic of Koroglu  (from Azerbaijani: kor oğlu 
for blind man's son), a legendary folk hero.[246]  Several documented versions of Koroglu epic remain at the Institute for
Manuscripts of the National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan.[234]

Modern literature in Azerbaijan is based on the Shirvani dialect mainly, while in Iran it is based on the Tabrizi one. The first
newspaper in Azerbaijani, Akinchi  was published in 1875. In the mid-19th century, it was taught in the schools of Baku, Ganja, 
Shaki, Tbilisi, and Yerevan. Since 1845, it has also been taught in the University of Saint Petersburg  in Russia.

FOLK ART
Main article: Azerbaijani folk art
Traditional Azerbaijani clothing and musical instruments.Azerbaijanis have a rich and distinctive culture, a major part of which
is decorative  and applied art. This form of art is represented by a wide range of handicrafts, such as chasing, jeweler,
engraving in metal, carving in wood, stone and bone, carpet-making, lasing, pattern weaving and printing, knitting and embroidery.
Each of these types of decorative art, evidence of the and endowments of the Azerbaijan nation, is very much in favor here. Many
interesting facts pertaining to the development of arts and crafts in Azerbaijan were reported by numerous merchants, travelers
and diplomats who had visited these places at different times.

The Azerbaijani carpet  is a traditional handmade textile of various sizes, with dense texture and a pile or pile-less surface,
whose patterns are characteristic of Azerbaijan's many carpet-making regions. In November 2010 the Azerbaijani carpet was
proclaimed a Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage  by UNESCO.[247][248]

Handwork coppery in Lahic.Azerbaijan has been since the ancient times known as a center of a large variety of crafts. The
archeological dig on the territory of Azerbaijan testifies to the well developed agriculture, stock raising, metal working,
pottery, ceramics, and carpet-weaving that date as far back as to the 2nd millennium BC. Archeological sites in Dashbulaq,
Hasansu, Zayamchai, and Tovuzchai uncovered from the BTC pipeline have revealed early Iron Age artifacts.[249]

Azerbaijani carpets can be categorized under several large groups and a multitude of subgroups. Scientific research of the
Azerbaijani carpet is connected with the name of Latif Kerimov, a prominent scientist and artist. It was his classification that
related the four large groups of carpets with the four geographical zones of Azerbaijan, Guba-Shirvan, Ganja-Kazakh, Karabakh and
Tabriz.[250]

CUISINE
Main article: Azerbaijani cuisineDushbara, a traditional Azerbaijani meal.The traditional cuisine is famous for an abundance of
vegetables and greens used seasonally in the dishes. Fresh herbs, including mint, cilantro (coriander), dill, basil, parsley,
tarragon, leeks, chives, thyme, marjoram, green onion, and watercress, are very popular and often accompany main dishes on the
table. Climatic diversity and fertility of the land are reflected in the national dishes, which are based on fish from the 
Caspian
Sea, local meat (mainly mutton and beef), and an abundance of seasonal vegetables and greens. Saffron-rice plov  is the flagship
food in Azerbaijan and black tea  is the national beverage.[251]  Azerbaijanis often use traditional armudu  (pear-shaped) glass
as they have very strong tea culture.[252][253]  Popular traditional dishes include bozbash  (lamb soup that exists in several
regional varieties with the addition of different vegetables), qutab  (fried turnover with a filling of greens or minced meat) and
 dushbara  (sort of dumplings of dough filled with ground meat and flavor).

ARCHITECTURE
Main article: Architecture of AzerbaijanMomine Khatun Mausoleum  in Nakhchivan  built in the 12th centuryAzerbaijani architecture
typically combines elements of East  and West.[254]  Many ancient architectural treasures such as the Maiden Tower  and Palace of
the Shirvanshahs  in the Walled City of Baku  survive in modern Azerbaijan. Entries submitted on the UNESCO World Heritage 
tentative list include the Ateshgah of Baku, Momine Khatun Mausoleum, Hirkan National Park, Binegadi National Park, Lökbatan Mud
Volcano, Baku Stage Mountain, Caspian Shore Defensive Constructions, Shusha National Reserve, Ordubad National Reserve  and the 
Palace of Shaki Khans.[255][256]

Among other architectural treasures are Quadrangular Castle  in Mardakan, Parigala  in Yukhary Chardaglar, a number of bridges
spanning the Aras River, and several mausoleums. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, little monumental architecture was created,
but distinctive residences were built in Baku and elsewhere. Among the most recent architectural monuments, the Baku subways  are
noted for their lavish decor.[257]

The task for modern Azerbaijani architecture is diverse application of modern aesthetics, the search for an architect's own
artistic style and inclusion of the existing historico-cultural environment. Major projects such as Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center,
 Flame Towers, Baku Crystal Hall, Baku White City  and SOCAR Tower  have transformed the country's skyline and promotes its
contemporary identity.[258][259]

VISUAL ART
Main article: Visual arts of Azerbaijan
A miniature painting  of a battle scene on the walls of the Palace of Shaki Khans, 18th century, city of Shaki.Azerbaijani art
includes one of the oldest art objects in the world, which were discovered as Gamigaya Petroglyphs  in the territory of Ordubad
Rayon  are dated back to the 1st to 4th centuries BC. About 1500 dislodged and carved rock paintings with images of deer, goats,
bulls, dogs, snakes, birds, fantastic beings and also people, carriages and various symbols had been found out on basalt rocks.
[260]  Norwegian ethnographer  and adventurer Thor Heyerdahl  was convinced that people from the area went to Scandinavia  in
about 100 AD and took their boat building skills with them, and transmuted them into the Viking boats in Northern Europe.[261]
[262]

Over the centuries, Azerbaijani art has gone through many stylistic changes. Azerbaijani painting is traditionally characterized
by a warmth of colour and light, as exemplified in the works of Azim Azimzade  and Bahruz Kangarli, and a preoccupation with
religious figures and cultural motifs.[263]  Azerbaijani painting enjoyed preeminence in Caucasus for hundreds of years, from the 
Romanesque  and Ottoman  periods, and through the Soviet  and Baroque  periods, the latter two of which saw fruition in
Azerbaijan. Other notable artists who fall within these periods include Sattar Bahlulzade, Togrul Narimanbekov, Tahir Salahov, 
Alakbar Rezaguliyev, Mirza Gadim Iravani, Mikayil Abdullayev  and Boyukagha Mirzazade.[264]

CINEMA
Scene from the Azerbaijani film In the Kingdom of Oil and Millions, 1916Main articles: Cinema of Azerbaijan, Azerbaijani animation
, and Television in AzerbaijanThe film industry in Azerbaijan dates back to 1898. In fact, Azerbaijan was among the first
countries involved in cinematography.[265]  Therefore, it's not surprising that this apparatus soon showed up in Baku  – at the
start of the 20th century, this bay town on the Caspian  was producing more than 50 percent of the world's supply of oil. Just
like today, the oil industry attracted foreigners eager to invest and to work.[266]  In 1919, during the Azerbaijan Democratic
Republic, a documentary The Celebration of the Anniversary of Azerbaijani Independence  was filmed on Azerbaijan's independence
day, 28 May, and premiered in June 1919 at several theatres in Baku.[267]  After the Soviet power was established in 1920, Nariman
Narimanov, Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of Azerbaijan, signed a decree nationalizing Azerbaijan's cinema. This also
influenced the creation of Azerbaijani animation.[267]

In 1991, after Azerbaijan gained its independence from the Soviet Union, the first Baku International Film Festival East-West was
held in Baku. In December 2000, the former President of Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev, signed a decree proclaiming 2 August to be the
professional holiday of filmmakers of Azerbaijan. Today Azerbaijani filmmakers are again dealing with issues similar to those
faced by cinematographers prior to the establishment of the Soviet Union in 1920. Once again, both choice of content and
sponsorship of films are largely left up to the initiative of the filmmaker.[265]

MEDIA AND MEDIA FREEDOM
Main articles: Media of Azerbaijan  and Media freedom in AzerbaijanThere are three state-owned television channels: AzTV, Idman TV  and Medeniyyet TV. One public channel and 6 private channels: 
İctimai Television, ANS TV, Space TV, Lider TV, Azad Azerbaijan TV, Xazar TV  and Region TV.

Print and broadcast media in Azerbaijan are almost wholly under control of the ruling Aliyev family, eventually through friendly
intermediaries.[268]  Ownership opacity is backed by law. Azerbaijan hosts 9 national TV stations (of which a public service
broadcaster and 3 more state-run channels), over 12 regional TV stations, 25 radio channels, over 30 daily newspapers. Opposition
media manages to work on the perpetual brink of survival.[269]

HUMAN RIGHTS IN AZERBAIJAN
Main article: Human rights in AzerbaijanThe Constitution of Azerbaijan  claims to guarantee freedom of speech, but this is denied in practice. After several years of
decline in press and media freedom, in 2014 the media environment in Azerbaijan deteriorated fast under a governmental campaign to
silence any opposition and criticism, even while the country led the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe 
(May–November 2014). Spurious legal charges and impunity in violence against journalists have remained the norm.[270]  All foreign
broadcasts are banned in the country.[269]

According to the 2013 Freedom House  Freedom of the Press report, Azerbaijan's press freedom status is "not free," and Azerbaijan
ranks 177th out of 196 countries.[271]

BBC, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty  and Voice of America  are banned in Azerbaijan.[272]

During the last few years, three journalists were killed and several prosecuted in trials described as unfair by international
human rights organizations. Azerbaijan has the biggest number of journalists imprisoned in Europe and Central Asia in 2015,
according to the Committee to Protect Journalists, and is the 5th most censored country in the world, ahead of Iran and China.
[273]

A report by an Amnesty International  researcher in October 2015 points to '...the severe deterioration of human rights in
Azerbaijan over the past few years. Sadly Azerbaijan has been allowed to get away with unprecedented levels of repression and in
the process almost wipe out its civil society'.[274]  Amnesty's 2015/16 annual report[275]  on the country stated ' ...
persecution of political dissent continued. Human rights organizations remained unable to resume their work. At least 18 prisoners
of conscience remained in detention at the end of the year. Reprisals against independent journalists and activists persisted both
in the country and abroad, while their family members also faced harassment and arrests. International human rights monitors were
barred and expelled from the country. Reports of torture and other ill-treatment persisted.'

SPORTS
Main article: Sport in AzerbaijanShakhriyar Mamedyarov  was the 2013 World Rapid Chess  and two-time European Team Chess 
champion.Sport in Azerbaijan has ancient roots, and even now, both traditional and modern sports are still practiced. Freestyle wrestling 
has been traditionally regarded as Azerbaijan's national sport, in which Azerbaijan won up to fourteen medals, including four
golds since joining the National Olympic Committee. Currently, the most popular sports include football  and chess.[276]

Football is the most popular sport in Azerbaijan, and the Association of Football Federations of Azerbaijan  with 9,122 registered
players, is the largest sporting association in the country.[277][278]  The national football team  of Azerbaijan demonstrates
relatively low performance in the international arena compared to the nation football clubs. The most successful Azerbaijani
football clubs are Neftchi Baku, Inter Baku, Qarabağ, and Khazar Lankaran. In 2012, Neftchi Baku became the first Azerbaijani team
to advance to the group stage of a European competition, beating APOEL  of Cyprus 4-2 on aggregate in the play-off round of the 
2012-13 UEFA Europa League.[279][280]  In 2014, Qarabağ became the second Azerbaijani club advancing to the group stage of UEFA
Europa League. Futsal  is another popular sport in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijan national futsal team  reached fourth place in the 
2010 UEFA Futsal Championship, while domestic club Araz Naxçivan  clinched bronze medals at the 2009–10 UEFA Futsal Cup  and 
2013–14 UEFA Futsal Cup.[281]  Azerbaijan is the main sponsor of Spanish football club Atlético de Madrid, a partnership that the
club describes should 'promote the image of Azerbaijan in the world'.[282]

Azerbaijan is one of the traditional powerhouses of world chess,[283]  having hosted many international chess tournaments and
competitions and became European Team Chess Championship  winners in 2009 and 2013.[284][285][286]  Notable chess players from
country's chess schools that made a great impact on the game in world, includes Teimour Radjabov, Shahriyar Mammadyarov, Vladimir
Makogonov, Vugar Gashimov  and former World Chess Champion  Garry Kasparov. As of 2014[update], country's home of Shamkir Chess  a
category 22 event and one of the highest rated tournaments of all time.[287]  Backgammon  also plays a major role in Azerbaijani
culture.[288]  The game is very popular in Azerbaijan and is widely played among the local public.[289]  There are also different
variations of backgammon developed and analyzed by Azerbaijani experts.[290]

Baku National Stadium  was used for the first European Games  in June 2015.Azerbaijan is one of the leading volleyball countries
in the world and its Azerbaijan Women's Volleyball Super League  is one of strongest women leagues in world. Its women's national
team came fourth at the 2005 European Championship.[291]  Over the last years, clubs like Rabita Baku  and Azerrail Baku  achieved
great success at European cups.[292]  Azerbaijani volleyball players include likes of Valeriya Korotenko, Oksana Parkhomenko, 
Inessa Korkmaz, Natalya Mammadova  and Alla Hasanova.

Azerbaijan has a Formula One race-track  and country hosted its first Formula One  Grand Prix on 19 June 2016.[293]

Other well-known Azerbaijani athletes are Namig Abdullayev, Toghrul Asgarov, Rovshan Bayramov, Sharif Sharifov, Mariya Stadnik 
and Farid Mansurov  in wrestling, Elnur Mammadli, Elkhan Mammadov  and Nazim Huseynov  in judo, Rafael Aghayev  in karate, 
Magomedrasul Majidov  and Aghasi Mammadov  in boxing, Nizami Pashayev  in Olympic weightlifting, Azad Asgarov  in pankration, 
Eduard Mammadov  in kickboxing, and K-1  fighter Zabit Samedov. Azerbaijan has recently employed a number of top Iranian athletes
and coaches to its national teams by granting them Azerbaijani nationalities. These include Saman Tahmasebi, Sabah Shariati and
Jamshid Kheyrabadi in wrestling; and Reza Mehmandoost and Milad Beigi in Taekwando.[294]

Azerbaijan hosted several major sport competitions in last decade, including the 2013 F1 Powerboat World Championship, 2012 FIFA
U-17 Women's World Cup, 2011 AIBA World Boxing Championships, 2010 European Wrestling Championships, 2009 Rhythmic Gymnastics
European Championships, 2014 European Taekwondo Championships.[295]  On 8 December 2012, Baku  was selected to host the 2015
European Games, the first to be held in competition's history.[296]  Baku is also set to host the forth Islamic Solidarity Games 
in 2017. The most important annual sporting events held in the country are Baku Cup  and Tour d'Azerbaïdjan  cycling race.

SEE ALSO
 * Azerbaijan portal
 * Asia portal

 * Book: Azerbaijan

 * Outline of Azerbaijan
 * Index of Azerbaijan-related articles

REFERENCES
 1.   ^  "Azərbaycanda Əhalinin Sayı Açıqlandı" [Population of Azerbaijan Announced]  (in Azerbaijani). 15 December 2014.
 2.   ^ a  b  c  d  "Azerbaijan". International Monetary Fund.
 3.   ^  "Gini Index". World Bank. Retrieved 2 March  2011.
 4.   ^  "Human Development Index, 2012 Update". United Nations. 2011. Retrieved 15 June  2012.
 5.   ^  While often politically aligned with Europe, Azerbaijan is generally considered to be at least mostly in Southwest Asia
      geographically with its northern part bisected by the standard Asia-Europe divide, the Greater Caucasus. The United Nations 
      classification of world regions  places Azerbaijan in Western Asia; the CIA World Factbook  places it mostly in Southwest
      Asia [1]  and Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary  places it in both; NationalGeographic.com, and Encyclopædia
      Britannica  also place Georgia in Asia. Conversely, some sources place Azerbaijan in Europe such as Worldatlas.com.
 6.   ^ a  b  c  d  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (1995). Russia and Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition. Columbia University Press.
      pp. 69, 133. ISBN978-0-231-07068-3.
 7.   ^  Pipes, Richard  (1997). The Formation of the Soviet Union: Communism and Nationalism 1917–1923  (2nd ed.). Cambridge,
      Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp. 218–220, 229. ISBN978-0-674-30951-7.
 8.   ^  King, David C. (2006). Azerbaijan. Marshall Cavendish. p. 27. ISBN978-0761420118.
 9.   ^  Zürcher, Christoph (2007). The Post-Soviet Wars: Rebellion, Ethnic Conflict, and Nationhood in the Caucasus
      ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). New York: New York University Press. p. 168. ISBN978-0814797099.
 10.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 822 от 30 апреля 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Archived from the original  on 3 May 2011.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 11.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 853 от 29 июля 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 12.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 874 14 октября 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Archived from the original  on 3 May 2011.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 13.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 884 от 12 ноября 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 14.  ^ a  b  c  d  "Azerbaijan: Membership of international groupings/organisations". British Foreign & Commonwealth Office. 
      Archived  from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 15.  ^  Europa Publications Limited (1998). Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States. Routledge. p. 154. ISBN
      978-1-85743-058-5.
 16.  ^ a  b  "Elections & Appointments – Human Rights Council". United Nations. Archived  from the original on 20 December 2008.
      Retrieved 3 January  2009.
 17.  ^  "The non-aligned engagement". The Jakarta Post. Retrieved 26 May  2011.
 18.  ^  Cornell, Svante E. (2010). Azerbaijan Since Independence. M.E. Sharpe. pp. 165, 284. Indicative of general regional
      trends and a natural reemergence of previously oppressed religious identity, an increasingly popular ideological basis for
      the pursuit of political objectives has been Islam.... The government, for its part, has shown an official commitment to
      Islam by building mosques and respecting Islamic values... Unofficial Islamic groups sought to use aspects of Islam to
      mobilize the population and establish the foundations for a future political struggle.... Unlike Turkey, Azerbaijan does not
      have the powerful ideological legacy of secularism... the conflict with Armenia has bred frustration that is increasingly
      being answered by a combined Islamic and nationalist sentiment, especially among younger people... All major political
      forces are committed to secularism and are based, if anything, on a nationalist agenda.
 19.  ^  "Human Development Index and its components"  (PDF). United Nations Development Programme.
 20.  ^  "Interactive Infographic of the World's Best Countries". Newsweek. 15 August 2010. Archived  from the original on 22 July
      2011. Retrieved 24 July  2011.
 21.  ^  "Literacy rate among schoolchildren in Azerbaijan is 100% – UN report". News.Az. 28 October 2011.
 22.  ^  "Employment statistics in Azerbaijan". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Retrieved 26 May 
      2007.
 23.  ^  "Azerbaijan and the 2013 presidential election"  (PDF). UK Parliament briefing papers. 25 October 2013.
 24.  ^  "2012 Corruption Perceptions Index – Results". Transparency International. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 25.  ^  "Introduction: Azerbaijan". CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 6 March  2014.
 26.  ^  "Human Rights Watch: Azerbaijan". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved 6 March  2014.
 27.  ^  Houtsma, M. Th.  (1993). First Encyclopaedia of Islam 1913–1936  (reprint ed.). BRILL. ISBN978-90-04-09796-4.
 28.  ^  Schippmann, Klaus (1989). Azerbaijan: Pre-Islamic History. Encyclopædia Iranica. pp. 221–224. ISBN978-0-933273-95-5.
 29.  ^  Minahan, James (1998). Miniature Empires: A Historical Dictionary of the Newly Independent States. Greenwood Publishing
      Group. p. 20. ISBN978-0-313-30610-5.
 30.  ^  Chamoux, François (2003). Hellenistic Civilization. John Wiley and Sons. p. 26. ISBN978-0-631-22241-5.
 31.  ^  Bosworth A.B., Baynham E.J. (2002). Alexander the Great in Fact and fiction. Oxford University Press. p. 92. ISBN
      978-0-19-925275-6.
 32.  ^ a  b  Nevertheless, "despite being one of the chief vassals of Sasanian Shahanshah, the Albanian king had only a semblance
      of authority, and the Sassanid marzban  (military governor) held most civil, religious, and military authority.
 33.  ^ a  b  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (1999). Historical Dictionary of Azerbaijan. Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press. ISBN
      978-0-8108-3550-4.
 34.  ^  Darmesteter, James  (2004). "Frawardin Yasht". Avesta Khorda Avesta: Book Of Common Prayer  (reprint ed.). Kessinger
      Publishing. p. 93. ISBN978-1-4191-0852-5.
 35.  ^ a  b  c  "Azerbaijan: Early History: Iranian and Greek Influences". U.S. Library of Congress. Retrieved 7 June  2006.
 36.  ^In dictionariesF. Steingass: * āẕar-bād-gān
       * āẕar-abād-gūn
       * āẕar, āẕur
       * ādar
       * bāygān
       * pāy
      
      Dehkhoda: * آذربایجان/Âzarbâyjân  Archived  20 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آذربایگان/Âzarbâygân  Archived  16 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آذربادگان/Âzarbâdegân[permanent dead link]
       * آذر/Âzar  Archived  24 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آدر/Âdar  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * بایگان/Bâygân  Archived  27 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * بادگان/Bâdegân  Archived  10 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
       * -پای/pây-  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * گان-/-gân  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * جان-/-jân  Archived  28 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine. (Persian)
      
      
 37.  ^  Touraj Atabaki. Iran and the First World War: Battleground of the Great Powers'  I.B.Tauris, 4 September 2006 ISBN
      978-1860649646  p 132
 38.  ^  Yilmaz, Harun (2015). National Identities in Soviet Historiography: The Rise of Nations Under Stalin. Routledge. p. 21. 
      ISBN978-1317596646. On May 27, the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan (DRA) was declared with Ottoman military support. The
      rulers of the DRA refused to identify themselves as [Transcaucasian] Tatar, which they rightfully considered to be a Russian
      colonial definition. (...) Neighboring Iran did not welcome did not welcome the DRA's adoptation of the name of "Azerbaijan"
      for the country because it could also refer to Iranian Azerbaijan and implied a territorial claim.
 39.  ^  Barthold, Vasily (1963). Sochineniya, vol II/1. Moscow. p. 706. (...) whenever it is necessary to choose a name that will
      encompass all regions of the republic of Azerbaijan, name Arran  can be chosen. But the term Azerbaijan was chosen because
      when the Azerbaijan republic was created, it was assumed that this and the Persian Azerbaijan  will be one entity, because
      the population of both has a big similarity. On this basis, the word Azerbaijan was chosen. Of course right now when the
      word Azerbaijan is used, it has two meanings as Persian Azerbaijan and as a republic, its confusing and a question rises as
      to which Azerbaijan is talked about.  |access-date=  requires |url=  (help)
 40.  ^ a  b  Atabaki, Touraj (2000). Azerbaijan: Ethnicity and the Struggle for Power in Iran. I.B.Tauris. p. 25. ISBN
      9781860645549.
 41.  ^ a  b  c  Dekmejian, R. Hrair; Simonian, Hovann H. (2003). Troubled Waters: The Geopolitics of the Caspian Region. I.B.
      Tauris. p. 60. ISBN978-1860649226. Until 1918, when the Musavat regime decided to name the newly independent state
      Azerbaijan, this designation had been used exclusively to identify the Iranian province of Azerbaijan.
 42.  ^ a  b  c  Rezvani, Babak (2014). Ethno-territorial conflict and coexistence in the caucasus, Central Asia and Fereydan:
      academisch proefschrift. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. p. 356. ISBN978-9048519286. The region to the north of the
      river Araxes was not called Azerbaijan prior to 1918, unlike the region in northwestern Iran that has been called since so
      long ago.
 43.  ^  Fragner, B.G. (2001). Soviet Nationalism: An Ideological Legacy to the Independant Republics of Central Asia. I.B. Tauris
      and Company. pp. 13–32. In the post Islamic sense, Arran and Shirvan  are often distinguished, while in the pre-Islamic era,
      Arran or the western Caucasian Albania  roughly corresponds to the modern territory of the republic of Azerbaijan. In the 
      Soviet  era, in a breathtaking manipulation, historical Azerbaijan  (northwestern Iran) was reinterpreted as "South
      Azerbaijan" in order for the Soviets to lay territorial claim on historical Azerbaijan proper which is located in modern-day
      northwestern Iran.  |access-date=  requires |url=  (help)
 44.  ^  Azakov, Siyavush. "National report on institutional landscape and research policy Social Sciences and Humanities in
      Azerbaijan"  (PDF). Institute of Physics. Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 45.  ^  Chaumont, M. L. (1984). "Albania". Encyclopædia Iranica.
 46.  ^  Maps and accompanying commentary in Hewsen, Robert H. Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
      2001: map 19 (Orontid Armenia, p. 33), map 20 (Empire of Tigranes the Great, p. 34, map 21 (Artaxiad Armenia, p. 35), map 27
      (Arsakid Armenia, p. 45
 47.  ^  A. E. Redgate. The Armenians. Blackwell Publishers. Oxford. Maps 2.1, 7.2, 8.2
 48.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001, p. 102.
 49.  ^  Robert H. Hewsen. Ethno-history and the Armenian influence upon the Caucasian Albanians. Classical Armenian culture:
      Influence and creativity, Scholars press, Philadelphia, 1982, p.33.
 50.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (2001). "Armenia: a Historical Atlas". Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  Missing or empty |url=  (
      
      help)  map Caucasian Albania
 51.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (1982). Thomas J. Samuelian, ed. "Ethno-History and the Armenian Influence upon the Caucasian
      Albanians". Classical Armenian Culture: Influences and Creativity. (Philadelphia: Scholars Press. p. 45.  Missing or empty 
      |url=  (help)
 52.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (2001). Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 32–33, map 19 (shows the
      territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh as part of the Orontids' Kingdom of Armenia).
 53.  ^  Моисей Хоренский. Армянская География VII в. Перевод Патканова К.П. СПб., 1877. стр. 40,17
 54.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. "The Kingdom of Artsakh," in T. Samuelian & M. Stone, eds. Medieval Armenian Culture. Chico, CA, 1983
 55.  ^  Yarshater, E. (1987). "The Iranian Language of Azerbaijan". Encyclopædia Iranica. III/2.
 56.  ^  Ludwig, Paul (1998). Proceedings of the Third European Conference of Iranian Studies. 1  (Nicholas Sims-Williams (ed.)
      ed.). Cambridge: Wiesbaden: Reichert. ISBN978-3-89500-070-6.
 57.  ^  Roy, Olivier (2007). The new Central Asia: geopolitics and the birth of nations  (reprint ed.). I.B. Tauris. p. 6. ISBN
      978-1-84511-552-4.
 58.  ^  R. Ward, Steven (2009). Immortal: a military history of Iran and its armed forces. Georgetown University Press. p. 43. 
      ISBN978-1-58901-258-5.
 59.  ^  Malcolm Wagstaff, John (1985). The evolution of middle eastern landscapes: an outline to A.D. 1840, Part 1840. Rowman &
      Littlefield. p. 205. ISBN978-0-389-20577-7.
 60.  ^  L. Altstadt, Audrey (1992). The Azerbaijani Turks: power and identity under Russian rule. Hoover Press. p. 5. ISBN
      978-0-8179-9182-1.
 61.  ^  Akiner, Shirin  (2004). The Caspian: politics, energy and security. RoutledgeCurzon. p. 158. ISBN978-0-7007-0501-6.
 62.  ^  Shirin Akiner (2004). The Caspian. Taylor & Francis. ISBN9780203641675. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 63.  ^  "In Safavi times, Azerbaijan was applied to all the muslim-ruled khanates of the eastern Caucasian as well, as to the
      area south of the Araz River as far as the Qezel Uzan River, the latter region being approximately the same as the modern
      Iranian ostans of East and West Azerbaijan."Atkin, Muriel (1980). Russia and Iran, 1780–1828. University of Minnesota Press.
      p. xi. ISBN978-0-8166-5697-4.
 64.  ^  Walker, Christopher J. (1980). Armenia, the survival of a nation. Croom Helm. p. 45. Tsitsianov next moved against the
      semi-independent Iranian khanates. On the thinnest of pretexts he captured the Muslim town of Gandja, the seat of Islamic
      learning in the Caucasus (...)
 65.  ^  Saparov, Arsène (2014). From Conflict to Autonomy in the Caucasus: The Soviet Union and the Making of Abkhazia, South
      Ossetia and Nagorno Karabakh. Routledge. ISBN978-1317637837. Even though these principalities [the khanates] had not been
      under Iranian suzerainty since the assasination of Nadir Shah  in 1747, they were traditionally considered an inalienable
      part of Iranian domains. (...) To the semi-independent Caucasian principalities the appearance of the new Great Power (...)
 66.  ^  Kashani-Sabet, Firoozeh (May 1997). "Fragile Frontiers: The Diminishing Domains of Qajar Iran". International Journal of
      Middle East Studies. 29  (2): 210. doi:10.1017/s0020743800064473. In 1795, Ibrahim Khalil Khan, the wali of Qarabagh, warned
      Sultan Selim III of Aqa Muhammad Khan's ambitions. Fearing for his independence, he informed the Sultan of Aqa Muhammad
      Khan's ability to subdue Azerbaijan and later Qarabagh, Erivan, and Georgia.
 67.  ^  Barker, Adele Marie; Grant, Bruce (2010). The Russia Reader: History, Culture, Politics. Duke University Press. p. 253. 
      ISBN978-0822346487. But they were relatively more accessible given the organization of small, centralized, semi-independent
      khanates that functioned through the decline of Iranian rule after the death of Nadir Shah in the mid-eighteenth century
      (...)
 68.  ^  Avery, Peter; Hambly, Gavin (1991). The Cambridge History of Iran. Cambridge University Press. p. 126. ISBN
      978-0-521-20095-0. Agha Muhammad Khan could now turn to the restoration of the outlying provinces of the Safavid kingdom.
      Returning to Tehran in the spring of 1795, he assembled a force of some 60,000 cavalry and infantry and in Shawwal
      Dhul-Qa'da/May, set off for Azarbaijan, intending to conquer the country between the rivers Aras and Kura, formerly under
      Safavid control. This region comprised a number of khanates of which the most important was Qarabagh, with its capital at
      Shusha; Ganja, with its capital of the same name; Shirvan across the Kura, with its capital at Shamakhi; and to the
      north-west, on both banks of the Kura, Christian Georgia (Gurjistan), with its capital at Tiflis.
 69.  ^  Encyclopedia of Soviet law By Ferdinand Joseph Maria Feldbrugge, Gerard Pieter van den Berg, William B. Simons, Page 457
 70.  ^  King, Charles  (2008). The ghost of freedom: a history of the Caucasus. University of Michigan. p. 10. ISBN
      978-0-19-517775-6.
 71.  ^  Ga ́bor A ́goston,Bruce Alan Masters. Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire  Infobase Publishing, 1 January 2009 ISBN
      1438110251  p 125
 72.  ^  Multiple Authors. "Caucasus and Iran". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 3 September  2012.
 73.  ^  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (2004). Russian Azerbaijan, 1905–1920: The Shaping of a National Identity in a Muslim Community.
      Cambridge University Press. p. 5. ISBN978-0-521-52245-8.
 74.  ^ a  b  Timothy C. Dowling Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond  pp 728–729
      ABC-CLIO, 2 December 2014 ISBN 1598849484
 75.  ^  L. Batalden, Sandra (1997). The newly independent states of Eurasia: handbook of former Soviet republics. Greenwood
      Publishing Group. p. 98. ISBN978-0-89774-940-4.
 76.  ^  E. Ebel, Robert, Menon, Rajan (2000). Energy and conflict in Central Asia and the Caucasus. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 181.
       ISBN978-0-7425-0063-1.
 77.  ^  Andreeva, Elena (2010). Russia and Iran in the great game: travelogues and orientalism  (reprint ed.). Taylor & Francis.
      p. 6. ISBN978-0-415-78153-4.
 78.  ^  Çiçek, Kemal, Kuran, Ercüment (2000). The Great Ottoman-Turkish Civilisation. University of Michigan. ISBN
      978-975-6782-18-7.
 79.  ^  Ernest Meyer, Karl, Blair Brysac, Shareen (2006). Tournament of Shadows: The Great Game and the Race for Empire in
      Central Asia. Basic Books. p. 66. ISBN978-0-465-04576-1.
 80.  ^  Swietochowski, Tadeusz. Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia 2003  Taylor and Francis, 2003. ISBN 1857431375  p 104
 81.  ^  Russia and a Divided Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition, by Tadeusz Świętochowski, Columbia University Press, 1995,
      p. 66
 82.  ^  Smith, Michael (April 2001). "Anatomy of Rumor: Murder Scandal, the Musavat Party and Narrative of the Russian Revolution
      in Baku, 1917–1920". Journal of Contemporary History. 36  (2): 228. doi:10.1177/002200940103600202. The results of the March
      events were immediate and total for the Musavat. Several hundreds of its members were killed in the fighting; up to 12,000
      Muslim civilians perished; thousands of others fled Baku in a mass exodus
 83.  ^  Minahan, James B. Miniature Empires: A Historical Dictionary of the Newly Independent States. p. 22. ISBN0-313-30610-9. 
      The tensions and fighting between the Azerbaijanis and the Armenians in the federation culminated in the massacre of some
      12,000 Azerbaijanis in Baku by radical Armenians and Bolshevik troops in March 1918
 84.  ^  Michael Smith. "Pamiat' ob utratakh i Azerbaidzhanskoe obshchestvo/Traumatic Loss and Azerbaijani. National Memory". 
      Azerbaidzhan i Rossiia: obshchestva i gosudarstva (Azerbaijan and Russia: Societies and States)  (in Russian). Sakharov
      Center. Retrieved 21 August  2011.
 85.  ^ a  b  c  Kazemzadeh, Firuz (1951). The Struggle for Transcaucasia: 1917–1921. The New York Philosophical Library. pp. 124,
      222, 229, 269–270. ISBN978-0-8305-0076-5.
 86.  ^  Schulze, Reinhard. A Modern History of the Islamic World. I.B.Tauris, 2000. ISBN 978-1-86064-822-9.
 87.  ^  Горянин, Александр (28 August 2003). Очень черное золото  (in Russian). GlobalRus. Archived  from the original on 6
      September 2003. Retrieved 28 August  2003.
 88.  ^  Горянин, Александр. История города Баку. Часть 3.  (in Russian). Window2Baku.
 89.  ^  Pope, Hugh (2006). Sons of the conquerors: the rise of the Turkic world. New York: The Overlook Press. p. 116. ISBN
      978-1-58567-804-4.
 90.  ^  "Azerbaijan celebrates day of victory over fascism". "Contact.az". 9 May 2011. Retrieved 9 May  2011.
 91.  ^  "Victory over Nazis 'was impossible without Baku oil'". "AzerNEWS". 8 May 2010. Retrieved 8 May  2010.
 92.  ^  Michael P., Croissant (1998). The Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict: causes and implications. United States of America: Praeger
      Publishers. pp. 36, 37. ISBN0-275-96241-5.
 93.  ^  "Human Rights Watch. "Playing the "Communal Card": Communal Violence and Human Rights"". Human Rights Watch.
 94.  ^ a  b  "Milli Məclisin tarixi. Azərbaycan SSR Ali Soveti (1920–1991-ci illər)" [The history of Milli Majlis. Supreme
      Soviet
      of Azerbaijan SSR (1920–1991)]. Retrieved 1 December  2010.
 95.  ^  Full text of the Bishkek Protocol with signatures of representatives of Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh, and Armenia. 
      http://peacemaker.un.org/armeniaazerbaijan-bishkekprotocol94
 96.  ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  "Azerbaijan". World Factbook. CIA. 2009. Archived  from the original on 10 June 2009. Retrieved 4
      June  2009.
 97.  ^  Thomas De Waal. Black Garden: Armenia And Azerbaijan Through Peace and War. New York: New York University Press, p. 286. 
      ISBN 978-0-8147-1945-9.
 98.  ^  "Massacre by Armenians Being Reported". New York Times. 3 March 1992. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 99.  ^  Smolowe, Jill (16 March 1992). "Tragedy Massacre in Khojaly". Time. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 100. ^  A Conflict That Can Be Resolved in Time: Nagorno-Karabakh. International Herald Tribune.  29 November 2003.
 101. ^  "General Assembly adopts resolution reaffirming territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, demanding withdrawal of all
      Armenian
      forces". United Nations General Assembly. 14 March 2008. Retrieved 14 March  2008.
 102. ^  Southern Caucasus: Facing Integration Problems, Ethnic Russians Long For Better Life. EurasiaNet.org. 30 August 2003.
 103. ^  "Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic". The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1979).
 104. ^  "Azerbaijan: Rise to power". Encyclopedia of the Nations. 3 October 1993. Archived  from the original on 10 June 2011.
      Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 105. ^  "Timeline: Azerbaijan A chronology of key events:". BBC News. 31 March 2011.
 106. ^  "Azeri rights activist says 35 imprisoned special police unit members very sick". BBC Archive. 2 June 2000. Retrieved 15
      August  2009.
 107. ^  Efron, Sonni (18 March 1995). "Azerbaijan Coup Attempt Crushed Caucasus: Loyal forces storm a building and overcome
      mutinous police units, president reports.". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 15 August  2009.
 108. ^  Mulvey, Stephen (14 October 2003). "Aliyev and son keep it in the family". BBC News. Retrieved 14 October  2003.
 109. ^  "Azerbaijan's Geidar Aliev dies at 80". ChinaDaily. 16 December 2003. Archived  from the original on 17 December 2003.
      Retrieved 13 December  2003.
 110. ^  "Nov 2013 – Action against opposition". Keesing's Record of World Events. November 2013. p. 53026.
 111. ^ a  b  c  "Geographical data". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Archived  from the original
      on 25 May 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 112. ^ a  b  c  d  e  "Azerbaijan: Biodiversity". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 113. ^  "Azerbaijan's mud volcanoes on Seven Wonders of Nature shortlist". News.Az. Archived  from the original on 10 February
      2010. Retrieved 8 February  2010.
 114. ^  "Ecological problems in Azerbaijan". Enrin.grida.no. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 115. ^  "Orography of Azerbaijan". United Nations Environment Programme. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 116. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – Climate". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 117. ^ a  b  c  d  "Climate". Water Resources of the Azerbaijan Republic. Institute of Hydrometeorology, Ministry of Ecology and
      Natural Resources. Archived from the original  on 24 May 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 118. ^  "Azerbaijan: Geography". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute.
 119. ^  "The Karabakh Horse". Karabakh Foundation.
 120. ^  "Azerbaijan – Flora". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Retrieved 5 March  2010.
 121. ^  "Monitors criticize Azerbaijani elections". Al Jazeera. Archived  from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 8
      November  2010.
 122. ^  "Azerbaijan – Freedom House". FreedomHouse.org. Retrieved 4 August  2013.
 123. ^  "Combined Average Ratings: Independent Countries 2009". FreedomHouse.org. 2009. Retrieved 10 July  2012.
 124. ^  "Jailed without trial in Azerbaijan," The Washington Post. 1 March 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2015.
 125. ^  "No, this is the truth about Azerbaijan’s repression." The Washington Post. 25 September 2015. Retrieved 26 September
      2015.
 126. ^  DISGRACED AZERBAIJAN AND THE END OF ELECTION MONITORING AS WE KNOW IT
 127. ^  Jamie Doward. "Plush hotels and caviar diplomacy: how Azerbaijan's elite wooed MPs". the Guardian. Retrieved 4 July  2015
      .
 128. ^  "Europe's caviar diplomacy with Azerbaijan must end". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 129. ^  "Baku Smooths Over Its Rights Record with a Thick Layer of Caviar". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 130. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – Foreign Relations". Country Studies. Retrieved 31 May  2007.
 131. ^  "Bilateral relations". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived  from the original on 4 May 2007. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 132. ^  Lenk, Arthur (7 March 2007). "15th Anniversary of Israel-Azebraijan Diplomatic Relations"  (PDF). Ministry of Foreign
      Affairs of Israel. Retrieved 21 March  2008.
 133. ^  Kardas, Saban. "Turkey Develops Special Relationship with Azerbaijan". Eurasia Daily Monitor Volume. Retrieved 23
      December  2010.
 134. ^  Katik, Mevlut. "Azerbaijan and Turkey Coordinate Nagorno-Karabakh Negotiation Position". EurasiaNet. Retrieved 23
      December  2010.
 135. ^ a  b  c  d  "National Security Concept of the Republic of Azerbaijan"  (PDF). United Nations. 23 May 2007. Retrieved 23
      May  2007.
 136. ^  Selim Özertem, Hasan. "Independence of Kosovo and the Nagorno-Karabakh Issue". TurkishWeekly. Retrieved 24 April  2008.
 137. ^  Botelho, Greg; Tuysuz, Gul (3 April 2016). "18 Armenian, 12 Azerbaijani troops killed in fighting". CNN.
 138. ^  "The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Administrative and territorial units of Azerbaijan
      Republic". Azstat.org. Archived  from the original on 12 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 139. ^  Azerbaijan: Short History of Statehood, Embassy of Republic of Azerbaijan in Pakistan, 2005, Chapter 3.
 140. ^  Creation of National Army in 1918  (Russian).
 141. ^  Law of the Republic of Azerbaijan on Armed Forces, No. 210-XII, 9 October 1991 (Russian).
 142. ^  Azerbaijan's Army Day (26 June)  declared by Presidential Decree of 22 May 1998.
 143. ^  C. W. Blandy Azerbaijan: Is War Over Nagornyy Karabakh a Realistic Option? Advanced Research and Assessment Group.
      Caucasus Series 08/17. – Defense Academy of the United Kingdom, 2008, p.12
 144. ^  Выступление Президента Азербайджанской Республики, Верховного Главнокомандующего Гейдара Алиева на церемонии,
      посвященной
      5-й годовщине образования Национальной гвардии – Штаб Национальной гвардии Азербайджана  (in Russian). Heydar Aliyev
      Heritage Research Center. 25 December 1996.
 145. ^  Abbasov, Shahin. "Azerbaijan: Baku Can Leapfrog over Ukraine, Georgia for NATO Membership". EurasiaNet. Archived  from
      the original on 6 June 2009. Retrieved 3 June  2009.
 146. ^ a  b  Владимир Мухин (24 January 2011). "Карабахский детонатор на взводе – В Баку и Ереване все четче звучит воинственная
      риторика". Nezavisimaya Gazeta. Archived  from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 147. ^  "Russia's neighbors are preparing for war (CIS countries and Georgia has surprised the world of increasing military
      expenditures)". Gruzianews.ru. 22 February 2011. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 148. ^  "AFP: Azerbaijan warns Armenia with show of military might". Google.com. 26 June 2011. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 149. ^  Eastern approaches Ex-communist Europe (3 October 2013). "The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict: A festering sore". The Economist
      . Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 150. ^  "Baku says Armenian president still hypocrite before world community". News.Az. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 151. ^  "Azerbaijan to start manufacturing arms, military hardware in 2008". BBC Monitoring Service. Retrieved 26 January  2008.
 152. ^  "Azerbaijan to produce tanks, aviation bombs and pilotless vehicles in 2009". panarmenian. Archived  from the original on
      9 January 2009. Retrieved 24 December  2008.
 153. ^  "Uzeir Jafarov: "Azerbaijan will be unable to produce competitive military technique in the next five years"". Today.Az.
      Retrieved 26 September  2008.
 154. ^  "President Ilham Aliyev attends the openings of several defense-related facilities". Today.Az. Retrieved 4 March  2011.
 155. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – General Information". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Archived  from the original on 5 May 2007. Retrieved 
      22 May  2007.
 156. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan's Q1 inflation rate 16.6%, National Bank Chief says". Today.Az. Retrieved 29 May  2007.
 157. ^  Mehdizade, Sevinj. "Azerbaijan's New Manats: Design and Transition to a New Currency". Azerbaijan International.
 158. ^  Ismayilov, Rovshan. "Azerbaijan's Manat Makeover: Good Times Ahead?". EurasiaNet. Retrieved 7 December  2010.
 159. ^  "Top 10 reformers from Doing Business 2009". World Bank Group. Doing Business. Archived  from the original on 12
      September 2008. Retrieved 28 September  2008.
 160. ^  "World Economic Forum – The Global Competitiveness Report 2010-2011"  (PDF). Archived  (PDF)  from the original on 6
      December 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 161. ^  Bibliothek der Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/id-moe/09454.pdf
 162. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – General Information". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Archived  from the original on 28 May 2007. Retrieved 
      22 May  2007.
 163. ^  "Azerbaijan: Economy". globalEDGE. Retrieved 29 May  2007.[dead link]
 164. ^  "SOCAR plans to completed full gasification of Azerbaijan only by 2021". Azerbaijan Business Center. Retrieved 6 June 
      2010.
 165. ^ a  b  "Natural resources". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Archived from the original  on
      10 June 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 166. ^  "Azerbaijan: Status of Database". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute. Archived from the original  on 20 March 2007.
      Retrieved 28 May  2007.
 167. ^  "Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor – Azerbaijan". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 168. ^  "Azerbaijan: Transportation". Encyclopedia of the Nations. Archived  from the original on 18 April 2007. Retrieved 24 May 
       2007.
 169. ^  "Industry"  (PDF). Statistical Yearbook of Azerbaijan 2004. Archived from the original  (PDF)  on 2 February 2007.
      Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 170. ^  "Rapid Tourism Assessment for the Azerbaijan Tourism Sector Development Program – Organization for Security and
      Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)". Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 171. ^  Azərbaycan Qarabağın turizm imkanlarını təbliğ edir  (Azerbaijani)
 172. ^  Ismayilov, Rovshan. "Azerbaijan: Baku Boom Has Yet to Hit Regions". EurasiaNet. Archived  from the original on 19 August
      2007. Retrieved 12 August  2007.
 173. ^  "Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Azerbaijan: Goals". Tourism.az. 6 February 2004. Archived  from the original on 28
      November 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 174. ^  Ziyadov, Taleh. "The New Silk Roads"  (PDF). Central Asia-Caucasus Institute Silk Road Studies Program.
 175. ^  Zeyno Baran  (2005). "The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline: Implications for Turkey"  (PDF). The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
      Pipeline: Oil Window to the West. The Central Asia-Caucasus Institute, Silk Road Studies Program: 103–118. Retrieved 30
      December  2007.
 176. ^  "SCP Commissioning Commences"  (Press release). BP. 1 June 2006. Archived from the original  on 11 October 2007.
      Retrieved 4 June  2008.
 177. ^  "List of Contracting Parties to the Convention on Road Traffic"  (PDF). UN Economic Commission for Europe. Archived from 
      the original  (PDF)  on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 23 January  2010.
 178. ^  "Azerbaijan aims for hi-tech state". Euronews. Retrieved 19 December  2010.
 179. ^  "Azerbaijan is in TOP 10 of countries showing dynamic growth in Internet and mobile communications penetration". 
      bakutel.az. Retrieved 15 April  2013.
 180. ^  CIA.gov, CIA World Factbook Telephones – main lines in use, Azerbaijan 1,397,000 main lines
 181. ^  CIA.gov, CIA World Factbook Internet users, Azerbaijan Internet users: 1,485,000.
 182. ^  "Azerbaijani scientist invents earthquake-resistant building". News.Az. Retrieved 18 March  2011.
 183. ^  "International Station for the Forecasting of Earthquakes Atropatena-AZ3, Baku, Azerbaijan". Global Network for the
      Forecasting of Earthquakes.
 184. ^  Азербайджанский ученый изобрел метод оповещения о землетрясении  (in Russian). BlackSea News. Retrieved 29 March  2011.
 185. ^  "Arianespace signs deal to launch Azerbaijani satellite". News.Az. Archived  from the original on 8 November 2010.
      Retrieved 5 November  2010.
 186. ^  "Azerbaijan signs deal with Arianespace to launch satellite". Space Travel. Archived  from the original on 6 November
      2010. Retrieved 5 November  2010.
 187. ^  "Orbital Contracted to Build Azerbaijan's First Satellite". SatelliteToday. 28 November 2010. Archived  from the original
      on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 1 April  2011.
 188. ^  "Baku developing satellite to kick off national space program". Hurriyet Daily News and Economic Review. 3 December 2009.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 189. ^  "Meeting held to coordinate orbital slots for Azersat". News.Az. 16 November 2009. Archived from the original  on 11 May
      2011. Retrieved 18 March  2016.
 190. ^  "Азербайджан рассчитывает запустить спутник связи AzerSat"  (in Russian). ComNews. Retrieved 29 July  2009.
 191. ^  The State Statistical Committee of the Azerbaijan Republic, The ethnic composition of the population according to the
      2009 census.
 192. ^ a  b  "Population". Azerbaijan Gender Information Center. Archived  from the original on 10 May 2007. Retrieved 27 May 
      2007.
 193. ^  "Xaricdəki təşkilatlar"  (in Azerbaijani). State Committee on Work with Diaspora. Retrieved 25 May  2007.
 194. ^ a  b  c  d  e  "Ethnic minorities". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived  from the original on 17 April 2007. Retrieved 
      27 May  2007.
 195. ^  CIA – The World Factbook. CIA.gov  "Iran".
 196. ^  "Demoqrafik göstəricilər". Gender.az  (in Azerbaijani). Retrieved 15 April  2013.
 197. ^ a  b  Population by language, sex and urban/rural residence, UN Data. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
 198. ^  "Ethnologue report for Azerbaijan". Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Archived  from the original on 18 December 2008.
      Retrieved 3 January  2009.
 199. ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  "Endangered languages in Europe and North Asia". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 200. ^  Clifton, John M., editor. 2002 (vol 1.), 2003 (vol. 2). Studies in languages of Azerbaijan. Baku, Azerbaijan and Saint
      Petersburg, Russia: Institute of International Relations, Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan and North Eurasian Group, SIL
      International.
 201. ^  "Berkley Center for Religion Peace and World Affairs". Georgetown University. July 2012. Retrieved 23 May  2015.
 202. ^  Sharifov, Azad. "Legend of the Bibi-Heybat Mosque". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 11 July  2010.
 203. ^  "Mapping The Global Muslim Population"  (PDF). Archived  (PDF)  from the original on 19 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 204. ^  Administrative Department of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan – Presidential Library – Religion
 205. ^  http://www.pewforum.org/2009/10/07/mapping-the-global-muslim-population/
 206. ^  GALLUP – What Alabamians and Iranians Have in Common  – data accessed on 19 August 2014
 207. ^  "Global Christianity". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 1 December 2014. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 208. ^  "Catholic Church in Azerbaijan". Catholic-Hierarchy. Archived  from the original on 29 April 2007. Retrieved 27 May  2007
      .
 209. ^ a  b  Corley, Felix (9 March 2002). "Azerbaijan: 125 religious groups re-registered". Keston News Service. Retrieved 9
      April  2002.
 210. ^  "5,000 Azerbaijanis adopted Christianity"  (in Russian). Day.az. 7 July 2007. Retrieved 30 January  2012.
 211. ^  "Christian Missionaries Becoming Active in Azerbaijan"  (in Azerbaijani). Tehran Radio. 19 June 2011. Retrieved 12 August 
       2012.
 212. ^  Rothholz, Peter (20 November 2015). "Jewish Life in Azerbaijan Embodies Muslim-Majority Nation's Culture of Tolerance".
      BreakingIsraelNews. JNS.org.
 213. ^  "Baku gives land for Jewish cultural center, kosher restaurant". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 11 December 2013.
 214. ^  Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany. "How I Accidentally Became a Lobbyist for Azerbaijan". Foreign Policy.
 215. ^  Sloame, Joanna. "Azerbaijan". Jewish Virtual Library. American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise.
 216. ^  http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/192997.pdf
 217. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan: A Country Study, Education, Health, and Welfare". Country Studies.
 218. ^  "Human Development Report 2009"  (PDF). United Nations Development Program 2009. Retrieved 2009.  Check date values in: 
      |access-date=  (help)
 219. ^  "Education in Azerbaijan, The Challenges of Transition". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 220. ^  Waters, Zena. "What exactly is Novruz Bayram". Azerbaijan Today. Retrieved 22 March  2009.
 221. ^  David C. King. Azerbaijan, Marshall Cavendish, 2006, p. 94
 222. ^ a  b  Энциклопедический музыкальный словарь, 2-е изд., Москва, 1966 (Encyclopedical Music Dictionary  (1966), 2nd ed.,
      Moscow)
 223. ^  "The Azerbaijan musical instruments". Atlas.musigi-dunya.az. Archived  from the original on 26 August 2007. Retrieved 27
      May  2007.
 224. ^  During, Jean (2001). "Azerbaijan". The Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. Macmillan. ISBN978-0-333-23111-1.
 225. ^  Duncan, Ishhad. "The Baku Jazz Festival: Reviving a Tradition in Azerbaijan". EurasiaNet. Archived  from the original on
      8 May 2005. Retrieved 27 April  2005.
 226. ^  "ashik,shaman"  – European University Institute, Florence, Italy  (retrieved 10 August 2006).
 227. ^  "Azerbaijan's ashug art included into UNESCO list of Intangible Cultural Heritage". Today.Az. Archived  from the original
      on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 1 October  2009.
 228. ^  Hutcheon, David (19 September 2008). "Alim Qasimov: the living legend you've never heard of". The Times. London.
      Retrieved 19 September  2008.
 229. ^  Augstein, Frank. "Azerbaijan duo upset favorites Ireland for first-time win at 2011 Eurovision Song Contest". Daily
      Journal. Associated Press. Retrieved 14 May  2011.
 230. ^  "Azerbaijan wins the Eurovision Song Contest". BBC News. 14 May 2011. Archived  from the original on 14 May 2011.
      Retrieved 14 May  2011.
 231. ^  Lusher, Adam (15 May 2011). "Azerbaijan wins Eurovision Song Contest". The Telegraph. London. Retrieved 15 May  2011.
 232. ^  Azerbaijan. Cultural life. Encyclopædia Britannica.
 233. ^ a  b  Beale, Thomas William; Keene Henry George (1894). An Oriental Biographical Dictionary. W.H.Allen. p. 311.
 234. ^ a  b  A.Caferoglu, "Adhari(azeri)",in Encyclopedia of Islam, (new edition), Vol. 1, (Leiden, 1986)
 235. ^  Tyrrell, Maliheh S. (2001). Aesopian Literary Dimensions of Azerbaijani Literature of the Soviet Period, 1920–1990.
      Lexington Books. p. 12. ISBN978-0-7391-0169-8.
 236. ^  Průšek, Jaroslav (1974). Dictionary of Oriental Literatures. Basic Books. p. 138.
 237. ^  Baldick, Julian (2000). Mystical Islam: An Introduction to Sufism. I.B. Tauris. p. 103. ISBN978-1-86064-631-7.
 238. ^ a  b  Burrill, Kathleen R.F. (1972). The Quatrains of Nesimi Fourteenth-Century Turkic Hurufi. Walter de Gruyter GmbH &
      Co. KG. ISBN978-90-279-2328-8.
 239. ^  Lambton, Ann K. S.; Holt, Peter Malcolm; Lewis, Bernard (1970). The Cambridge History of Islam. Cambridge University
      Press. p. 689. ISBN978-0-521-29138-5.
 240. ^ a  b  c  "Seyid Imadeddin Nesimi". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Archived  from the original on 18 January 2008.
      Retrieved 1 September  2008.
 241. ^  Babinger, Franz (2008). "Nesīmī, Seyyid ʿImād al-Dīn". Encyclopaedia of Islam. Brill Online. Retrieved 1 September  2008.
 242. ^  Michael E. Meeker, "The Dede Korkut Ethic", International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 24, No. 3 (Aug. 1992),
      395–417. excerpt: The Book of Dede Korkut is an early record of oral Turkic folktales in Anatolia, and as such, one of the
      mythic charters of Turkish nationalist ideology. The oldest versions of the Book of Dede Korkut consist of two manuscripts
      copied in the 16th century. The twelve stories that are recorded in these manuscripts are believed to be derived from a
      cycle of stories and songs circulating among Turkic peoples living in northeastern Anatolia and northwestern Azerbaijan.
      According to Lewis (1974), an older substratum of these oral traditions dates to conflicts between the ancient Oghuz and
      their Turkish rivals in Central Asia (the Pecheneks and the Kipchaks), but this substratum has been clothed in references to
      the 14th-century campaigns of the Akkoyunlu Confederation of Turkic tribes against the Georgians, the Abkhaz, and the Greeks
      in Trebizond. Such stories and songs would have emerged no earlier than the beginning of the 13th century, and the written
      versions that have reached us would have been composed no later than the beginning of the 15th century. By this time, the
      Turkic peoples in question had been in touch with Islamic civilization for several centuries, had come to call themselves
      "Turcoman" rather than "Oghuz," had close associations with sedentary and urbanized societies, and were participating in
      Islamized regimes that included nomads, farmers, and townsmen. Some had abandoned their nomadic way of life altogether.
 243. ^  Cemal Kafadar(1995), "in Between Two Worlds: Construction of the Ottoman states", University of California Press, 1995.
      Excerpt: "It was not earlier than the fifteenth century. Based on the fact that the author is buttering up both the
      Akkoyunlu and Ottoman rulers, it has been suggested that the composition belongs to someone living in the undefined border
      region lands between the two states during the reign of Uzun Hassan (1466–78). G. Lewis on the hand dates the composition
      "fairly early in the 15th century at least."
 244. ^ a  b  İlker Evrım Bınbaş,Encyclopædia Iranica, "Oguz Khan Narratives" Encyclopædia Iranica | Articles. Retrieved October
      2010. "The Ketāb-e Dede Qorqut, which is a collection of twelve stories reflecting the oral traditions of the Turkmens in
      the 15th-century eastern Anatolia, is also called Oḡuz-nāma"
 245. ^  Minorsky, Vladimir (1942). "The Poetry of Shah Ismail". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies,
      University of London. 10  (4): 1053. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00090182.
 246. ^  Samuel, Geoffrey; Gregor, Hamish; Stutchbury, Elisabeth (1994). Tantra and Popular Religion in Tibet. International
      Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan. p. 60. ISBN978-81-85689-68-5.
 247. ^  "The traditional art of Azerbaijani carpet weaving in the Republic of Azerbaijan". Unesco.org. Archived  from the
      original on 5 December 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 248. ^  "Azerbaijani carpet entered UNESCO List of Intangible Cultural Heritage". Azerbaijan Press Agency. Retrieved 4 January 
      2011.
 249. ^  "Ancient Heritage of the BTC – SCP Pipeline Corridor". Smithsonian. Retrieved 21 April  2014.
 250. ^  "Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura". UNESCO.
 251. ^  Akhmedov, IA. Азербайджанская кухня  (in Russian). Издательство "Ишыг".
 252. ^  "Chaihana: culture in action". Aze.info. Retrieved 14 December  2012.
 253. ^  The Azerbaijani Turks: power and identity under Russian rule. Audrey L. Altstadt. Hoover Institution Press. ISBN
      9780817991821. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 254. ^  Khanlou, Pirouz. "Baku's Architecture A Fusion of East and West". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 255. ^  "Azerbaijan Properties inscribed on the World Heritage List". UNESCO.
 256. ^  "World Heritage Sites in Azerbaijan". World Heritage Site.
 257. ^  "Over 70 underground stations to be built in Baku". News.Az. Retrieved 18 February  2011.
 258. ^  1 February 2012 Jon Walton (1 February 2012). "$100 Billion Khazar Islands Taking Shape". Construction Digital. Retrieved
       25 March  2013.
 259. ^  Glass, Nick. "Flame Towers light up Baku's historic skyline". CNN. Retrieved 14 April  2013.
 260. ^  Наскальные рисунки Гямигая
 261. ^  "Ornaments Coming from Gobustan". Diva International.
 262. ^  "Gobustan Rock Art". www.worldheritagesite.org. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 263. ^  "Azerbaijani Artists". www.arthistoryarchive.com. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 264. ^  "Steps of Time & Art is not only ugly". universes-in-universe.org. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 265. ^ a  b  "Cinema in Azerbaijan: Pre-Soviet Era". "Azerbaijan International". Autumn 1997. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 266. ^  Celebrating 100 Years in Film, not 80  by Aydin Kazimzade. Azerbaijan International, Autumn 1997
 267. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijani cinema in 1920–1935: Silent films". OCAZ.eu.
 268. ^  Kazimova, Arifa: "Media in Azerbaijan: The Ruling Family Dominates TV, the Opposition Has Some Papers" in the Caucasus
      Analytical Digest No. 25
 269. ^ a  b  Freedom House, Azerbaijan  2015 Press Freedom report
 270. ^  Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, The Protection of media freedom in Europe.Background report prepared by
      Mr William Horsley, special representative for media freedom of the Association of European Journalists
 271. ^  "Freedom of the Press 2013"  (PDF). Freedom House.
 272. ^  "Threat to retransmission of BBC, Voice of America and Radio Liberty/Radio Free Europe". Reporters Without Borders.
 273. ^  Ognianova, Nina. "Baku 2015: Press freedom, Azerbaijan, and the European Games". Committee to Protect Journalists.
 274. ^  Nozadze, Natalia. "Azerbaijan closes its doors". News. Amnesty International. Retrieved 15 June  2016.
 275. ^  Amnesty, International. "Annual report on Azerbaijan". Amnesty International.
 276. ^  "Sport". Expatwoman.com. Retrieved 12 April  2014.
 277. ^  "Azərbaycanda nə qədər futbolçu var?". news.milli.az  (in Azerbaijani). Retrieved 27 January  2014.
 278. ^  "Football in Azerbaijan". www.fifa.com. FIFA. Retrieved 27 January  2014.
 279. ^  "Нефтчи" стал первым азербайджанским футбольным клубом, вышедшим в групповой этап еврокубков – ФОТО. 1news.az  (in
      Russian). Retrieved 30 August  2012.
 280. ^  ЦСКА вылетел из еврокубков  (in Russian). UEFA. Retrieved 30 August  2012.
 281. ^  "Araz clinch third place on penalties". UEFA. 25 April 2010. Retrieved 25 April  2010.[dead link]
 282. ^  "Azerbaijan: Official Atlético sponsor". Club Atlético de Madrid. Retrieved 25 April  2015.
 283. ^  "Chess with Luke McShane". Express.co.uk. Retrieved 12 April  2014.
 284. ^  "Azerbaijan's chess team became European champion". Today.Az. 31 October 2009. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 285. ^  "Azerbaijan, Russia take gold at the European Team Chess Championship". Chessdom. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 286. ^  "World Chess Champion: Zeynab Mammadyarova". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 287. ^  "Carlsen beats Nakamura for perfect 2/2 start in the Gashimov Memorial". www.theweekinchess.com. Retrieved 24 April  2014
      .
 288. ^  История нард  (in Russian). 1-Kalyan. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 289. ^  Нарды – игра, требующая сноровки и удачи  (Russian)
 290. ^  История Нард  (in Russian). Nards.
 291. ^  "More than just Mammadova: Azerbaijan's ladies cause World Championship upset". www.fivb.org  (Press release). Retrieved 
      8 May  2014.
 292. ^  "Vakıfbank women achieve historic success, winning intercontinental volleyball trophy". www.hurriyetdailynews.com.
      Retrieved 8 May  2014.
 293. ^  Sylt, Christian. "F1 Will Race in Azerbaijan in 2016 Says Ecclestone". www.forbes.com. Retrieved 25 July  2014.
 294. ^  http://namnak.com/%D8%A7%DB%8C%D8%B1%D8%A7%D9%86%DB%8C-%D9%87%D8%A7%DB%8C-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D9%BE%DB%8C%DA%A9.p34800
 295. ^  "Azerbaijan is a country known for its love of sport and sportsmanship.". www.baku2015.com. Retrieved 27 January  2014.[
      permanent dead link]
 296. ^  "Baku 2015 heralds new era in European sports movement". The Washington Times. Retrieved 27 January  2014.

FURTHER READING
 * Olukbasi, Suha. Azerbaijan: A Political History. I.B. Tauris (2011). Focus on post-Soviet era.
 * de Waal, Thomas. Black Garden. NYU (2003). ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
 * Goltz, Thomas. Azerbaijan Diary : A Rogue Reporter's Adventures in an Oil-Rich, War-Torn, Post-Soviet Republic. M E Sharpe
   (1998). ISBN 0-7656-0244-X

EXTERNAL LINKS
Listen to this article  (info/dl)


This audio file was created from a revision of the "Azerbaijan" article dated 2008-06-23, and does not reflect subsequent edits to
the article. (Audio help)More spoken articlesThe Wikibook Wikijunior:Countries A-Z  has a page on the topic of: AzerbaijanFind
more aboutAzerbaijanat Wikipedia's sister projects * Definitions  from Wiktionary
 * Media  from Commons
 * News  from Wikinews
 * Quotations  from Wikiquote
 * Texts  from Wikisource
 * Textbooks  from Wikibooks
 * Travel guide  from Wikivoyage
 * Learning resources  from Wikiversity

General information * Azerbaijan International
 * Heydar Aliyev Foundation
 * Azerbaijan  at DMOZ
 * "Azerbaijan". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
 * Azerbaijan  at University of Colorado at Boulder
 * Country profile  from BBC
 * Key Development Forecasts for Azerbaijan  from International Futures
 *   Geographic data related to Azerbaijan  at OpenStreetMap
 *   Media related to Azerbaijan  at Wikimedia Commons

Major government resources * President of Azerbaijan website
 * Azerbaijan State Statistical Committee
 * United Nations Office in Azerbaijan

Major news media * Network NEWS Azerbaijan
 * Azerbaijan Today
 * Azerbaijan Press Agency
 * Trend News Agency
 * News.Az

Tourism * Azerbaijan Tourism Portal
 *   Wikimedia Atlas of Azerbaijan

Coordinates: 40°18′N 47°42′E﻿ /40.3°N 47.7°E﻿ / 40.3; 47.7

 * v
 * t
 * e

AzerbaijanarticlesHistoryEarly * Kura–Araxes culture
 * Khojaly–Gadabay culture
 * Shulaveri-Shomu culture
 * Mughan culture
 * Jar-Burial Culture
 * Leyla-Tepe culture
 * Mannaeans
 * Medes
 * Achaemenid Empire
 * Atropatene
 * Caucasian Albania
 * Parthian Empire
 * Arran (Caucasus)
 * Sasanian Empire
 * Shirvan

Middle Ages * Sajid dynasty
 * Sallarid dynasty
 * Rawwadids
 * Shaddadids
 * Shirvanshahs
 * Kingdom of Syunik  (Siunia dynasty)
 * Eldiguzids
 * Ilkhanate
 * Principality of Khachen  (House of Dop, House of Hasan-Jalalyan)
 * Kara Koyunlu
 * Ag Qoyunlu
 * Safavid dynasty
 * Afsharid dynasty
 * Zand dynasty
 * Qajar dynasty
 * Russo-Persian War (1804–13)
 * Treaty of Gulistan
 * Russo-Persian War (1826–28)
 * Treaty of Turkmenchay

Modern * Armenian–Tatar massacres
 * March Days
 * Armenian–Azerbaijani War
 * Azerbaijan Democratic Republic
 * Soviet Azerbaijan
 * Nagorno-Karabakh War
 * Black January
 * Independent Azerbaijan

By topic * History of the name Azerbaijan
 * The Land of Fire

Geography * Bodies of water
 * Caspian Sea
 * Climate
 * Earthquakes
 * Environment * issues
   
   
 * Extreme points
 * Fauna
 * Flora
 * Geology
 * Mountains
 * National parks
 * Orography
 * Protected areas
 * State reserves
 * Wildlife
 * more...

Subdivisions * Administrative divisions
 * Borders
 * Cities
 * World Heritage Sites
 * more...

PoliticsGovernment * Cabinet
 * Constitution
 * Elections
 * Foreign relations * European Union
   
   
 * Human rights * LGBT
   
   
 * Law enforcement
 * Ministry of National Security
 * National Assembly
 * Political parties
 * Politics
 * President
 * Prime Minister

Military * History
 * Air and Air Defence Force
 * Caspian Guard
 * Internal Troops
 * Land Forces
 * National Guard
 * Navy
 * Peacekeeping forces
 * State Border Service
 * Gabala Radar Station
 * Ministry of Defense
 * Ministry of Defence Industry
 * more...

Economy * Agriculture
 * Central Bank
 * Companies
 * Energy
 * Manat (currency)
 * Mineral industry
 * Petroleum industry
 * Telecommunications
 * Tourism
 * Transport
 * more...

Culture * Architecture
 * Art
 * Cinema
 * Cuisine
 * Dances
 * Dress
 * Folklore
 * Language
 * Literature
 * Media
 * Music * Ashiq
    * Meykhana
    * Mugham
   
   
 * Novruz (New Year)
 * Public holidays
 * Rugs
 * Sport
 * Theatre
 * more...

Demographics * Education
 * Ethnic minorities
 * Health
 * Languages
 * LGBT history
 * People * list
   
   
 * more...

Religion * Freedom of religion
 * Bahá'í
 * Christianity
 * Hinduism
 * Islam
 * Judaism
 * Zoroastrianism
 * more...

Symbols * Flag
 * National anthem
 * National emblem

 * Outline
 * Index

 * Book
 * Category
 * Portal

 * v
 * t
 * e

Countries and dependencies  of AsiaSovereign states * Afghanistan
 * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Bahrain
 * Bangladesh
 * Bhutan
 * Brunei
 * Cambodia
 * China
 * Cyprus
 * Egypt
 * Georgia
 * India
 * Indonesia
 * Iran
 * Iraq
 * Israel
 * Japan
 * Jordan
 * Kazakhstan
 * North Korea
 * South Korea
 * Kuwait
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Laos
 * Lebanon
 * Malaysia
 * Maldives
 * Mongolia
 * Myanmar
 * Nepal
 * Oman
 * Pakistan
 * Philippines
 * Qatar
 * Russia
 * Saudi Arabia
 * Singapore
 * Sri Lanka
 * Syria
 * Tajikistan
 * Thailand
 * East Timor (Timor-Leste)
 * Turkey
 * Turkmenistan
 * United Arab Emirates
 * Uzbekistan
 * Vietnam
 * Yemen

States with limited recognition * Abkhazia
 * Nagorno-Karabakh
 * Northern Cyprus
 * Palestine
 * South Ossetia
 * Taiwan

Dependencies  and  special
administrative regionsAustralia * Christmas Island
 * Cocos (Keeling) Islands

China * Hong Kong
 * Macau

United Kingdom * Akrotiri and Dhekelia
 * British Indian Ocean Territory

 * v
 * t
 * e

Sovereign states and dependencies  of EuropeSovereign states * Albania
 * Andorra
 * Armenia1
 * Austria
 * Azerbaijan1
 * Belarus
 * Belgium
 * Bosnia and Herzegovina
 * Bulgaria
 * Croatia
 * Cyprus1
 * Czech Republic
 * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * France
 * Georgia1
 * Germany
 * Greece1
 * Hungary
 * Iceland
 * Ireland
 * Italy
 * Kazakhstan1
 * Latvia
 * Liechtenstein
 * Lithuania
 * Luxembourg
 * Macedonia
 * Malta
 * Moldova
 * Monaco
 * Montenegro
 * Netherlands
 * Norway
 * Poland
 * Portugal
 * Romania
 * Russia1
 * San Marino
 * Serbia
 * Slovakia
 * Slovenia
 * Spain2
 * Sweden
 * Switzerland
 * Turkey1
 * Ukraine
 * United Kingdom
 * Vatican City

States with limited
recognition * Abkhazia1
 * Kosovo
 * Nagorno-Karabakh1
 * Northern Cyprus1
 * South Ossetia1
 * Transnistria

Dependencies  and
other territoriesDenmark * Faroe Islands * constituent country
   
   

Finland * Åland Islands * autonomous region
   
   

Norway * Jan Mayen
 * Svalbard * unincorporated areas
   
   

United Kingdom * Akrotiri and Dhekelia1 * sovereign base areas
   
   
 * Gibraltar * overseas territory
   
   
 * Guernsey
 * Isle of Man
 * Jersey * crown dependencies
   
   

1  Partially  in Asia, or entirely in Asia with cultural links to Europe. 2  Partially  in Africa * v
 * t
 * e

Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS) * Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia
 * Eurasian Economic Union
 * Union State

MembershipMembers * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Belarus
 * Kazakhstan
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Moldova
 * Russia
 * Tajikistan
 * Uzbekistan

Associate members * Turkmenistan
 * Ukraine

Former members * Georgia  (1993–2009)

History * Russian Empire
 * Soviet Union
 * Union of Sovereign States
 * Belavezha Accords  (Near abroad)
 * Alma-Ata Protocol

Sports * Unified Team at the Olympics
 * Unified Team at the Paralympics
 * CIS national bandy team
 * CIS national football team
 * CIS national ice hockey team
 * CIS national rugby team
 * CIS Cup (football)

Military * Collective Security Treaty Organization
 * Collective Rapid Reaction Force
 * Joint CIS Air Defense System

Economics * Economic Court
 * CISFTA
 * Eurasian Economic Community
 * Eurasian Patent Convention
 * Eurasian Patent Organization
 * EU Technical Aid

Organization * Interstate Aviation Committee

 *   Category

Authority control * WorldCat Identities
 * VIAF: 260253802
 * LCCN: n92000010
 * GND: 4068887-2
 * NDL: 00577523For other uses, see Country (disambiguation).
Map showing the countries of the world.A[1]  country  is a region that is identified as a distinct national entity in political geography. A country may be an
independent sovereign state  or one that is occupied by another state, as a non-sovereign  or formerly sovereign political
division, or a geographic region associated with sets of previously independent or differently associated people  with distinct
political characteristics. Regardless of the physical geography, in the modern internationally accepted legal definition as
defined by the League of Nations  in 1937 and reaffirmed by the United Nations  in 1945, a resident of a country is subject to the
independent exercise of legal jurisdiction.

Sometimes the word countries  is used to refer both to sovereign states and to other political entities,[2][3]  while other times
it refers only to states.[4]  For example, the CIA World Factbook  uses the word in its "Country name" field to refer to "a wide
variety of dependencies, areas of special sovereignty, uninhabited islands, and other entities in addition to the traditional
countries or independent states".[5][Note 1]



ETYMOLOGY AND USAGE
The word country  comes from Old French  cuntrée, itself derived from Vulgar Latin  (terra) contrata  (“(land) lying opposite;
(land) spread before”), derived from contra  (“against, opposite”). It most likely entered the English language after the 
Franco-Norman invasion  during the 11th century.

In English the word has increasingly become associated with political divisions, so that one sense, associated with the 
indefinite
article  – "a country" – through misuse and subsequent conflation is now a synonym  for state, or a former sovereign state, in the
sense of sovereign territory or "district, native land".[6]  Areas much smaller than a political state may be called by names such
as the West Country  in England, the Black Country  (a heavily industrialized part of England), "Constable Country" (a part of 
East Anglia  painted by John Constable), the "big country" (used in various contexts of the American West), "coal country" (used
of parts of the US and elsewhere) and many other terms.[7]

The equivalent terms in French and other Romance languages  (pays  and variants) have not carried the process of being identified
with political sovereign states as far as the English "country", instead derived from, pagus, which designated the territory
controlled by a medieval count, a title originally granted by the Roman Church. In many European countries the words are used for
sub-divisions of the national territory, as in the German Bundesländer, as well as a less formal term for a sovereign state.
France has very many "pays" that are officially recognised at some level, and are either natural regions, like the Pays de Bray,
or reflect old political or economic entities, like the Pays de la Loire.

A version of "country" can be found in the modern French language  as contrée, based on the word cuntrée  in Old French,[7]  that
is used similarly to the word "pays" to define non-state regions, but can also be used to describe a political state in some
particular cases. The modern Italian contrada  is a word with its meaning varying locally, but usually meaning a ward  or similar
small division of a town, or a village or hamlet in the countryside.

SOVEREIGNTY STATUS
See also: List of sovereign statesThe term "country" is frequently used to refer to sovereign states. There is no universal agreement on the number of "countries"
in the world, since a number of states have disputed sovereignty status. There are 206 sovereign states, with 193 states
participating in the United Nations, two observer states (the Holy See  and Palestine), and 11 other states. All are defined as
states by declarative theory of statehood  and constitutive theory of statehood. The latest proclaimed state is South Sudan.

Although not sovereign states, England, Scotland, Wales  and Northern Ireland  can be referred to as separate countries, which
collectively form the sovereign state known as the United Kingdom.[8][9][10][11]  The degree of autonomy of non-sovereign
countries varies widely. Some are possessions of sovereign states, as several states have overseas dependencies  (such as the 
British Virgin Islands  in UK  and Saint Pierre and Miquelon  in France), with citizenry at times identical and at times distinct
from their own. Such dependent territories are usually listed together with sovereign states on lists of countries, but may
nonetheless be treated as a separate "country of origin" in international trade, as Hong Kong  is.[12][13][14]

SEE ALSO
 * List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent
 * Lists of countries
 * Micronation
 * Nation
 * Sovereign state

NOTES
 1. ^  General information or statistical publications that adopt the wider definition for purposes such as illustration and
    comparison include:.[15][16][17][18][19][20][21][1]

REFERENCES
 1.  ^ a  b  "Measuring Misery around the World". Cato Institute.
 2.  ^  "Tjhe Kwet Koe v Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs & Ors [1997] FCA 912 (8 September 1997)". Australasian Legal
     Information Institute. Retrieved 2008-11-12.
 3.  ^  "U.S. Department of State Foreign Affairs Manual Volume 2—General"  (PDF). United States Department of State. Retrieved 
     2008-11-12.
 4.  ^  Rosenberg, Matt. "Geography: Country, State, and Nation". Retrieved 2008-11-12.
 5.  ^  "CIA - The World Factbook". Retrieved 2012-02-16.
 6.  ^  OED, Country
 7.  ^ a  b  John Simpson, Edmund Weiner (ed.). Oxford English Dictionary  (1971 compact ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University
     Press. ISBN0198611862.
 8.  ^  "Legal Research Guide: United Kingdom". Law Library of Congress. 2009-07-23. Retrieved 2013-03-29. The United Kingdom of
     Great Britain and Northern Ireland is the collective name of four countries, England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
     The four separate countries were united under a single Parliament through a series of Acts of Union.
 9.  ^  "Countries Within a Country". 10 Downing Street website. 10 Downing Street. 2003-01-10. Retrieved 2009-09-22. The United
     Kingdom is made up of four countries: England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
 10. ^  "Commonwealth Secretariat — Geography". Commonwealth Secretariat website. Commonwealth Secretariat. 2009-09-22. Retrieved 
     2009-09-22. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (UK) is a union of four countries: England, Scotland,
     Wales and Northern Ireland.
 11. ^  "Travelling Europe — United Kingdom". European Youth Portal. European Commission. 2009-06-29. Retrieved 2009-09-22. The
     United Kingdom is made up of four countries: England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales.
 12. ^  "Made In The British Crown Colony". Thuy-Tien Crampton.
 13. ^  "MATCHBOX LABEL, MADE IN HONG KONG". delcampe.net.
 14. ^  "Carrhart Made In Hong Kong?". ContractorTalk.
 15. ^  "Greenland Country Information". Countryreports.org. Retrieved 2008-05-28.  "The World Factbook – Rank Order – Exports".
     Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 2008-11-12.
 16. ^  "Index of Economic Freedom". The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 2008-11-12.
 17. ^  "Index of Economic Freedom - Top 10 Countries". The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 2008-11-12.
 18. ^  "Asia-Pacific (Region A) Economic Information"  (PDF). The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 2008-11-12.
 19. ^  "Subjective well-being in 97 countries"  (PDF). University of Michigan. Retrieved 2008-11-12.
 20. ^  Mercer's 2012 Cost of Living Survey city rankings. Mercer.com (2008-12-18). Retrieved on 2013-07-12.
 21. ^  EIU Digital Solutions. "Country, industry and risk analysis from The Economist Intelligence Unit - List of countries -
     The
     Economist Intelligence Unit". eiu.com.

FURTHER READING
 * Defining what makes a country  The Economist

EXTERNAL LINKS
Find more aboutCountryat Wikipedia's sister projects * Definitions  from Wiktionary
 * Media  from Commons
 * News  from Wikinews
 * Quotations  from Wikiquote
 * Texts  from Wikisource
 * Textbooks  from Wikibooks
 * Learning resources  from Wikiversity

Wikidata  has the property: country (P17)  (see uses) * The CIA World Factbook
 * Country Portals[1]  from the United States Department of State, including Background Notes
 * Country Studies  from the United States Library of Congress
 * Foreign Information by Country  and Country & Territory Guides  from GovPubs at UCB Libraries
 * United Nations statistics division

 * v
 * t
 * e

Lists of sovereign states and dependent territories by continentContinents * Africa
 * Antarctica
 * Asia
 * Europe
 * North America
 * Oceania
 * South America

Supercontinents * Americas
 * Eurasia

Authority control * GND: 4056618-3

 1. ^  Empty citation (help)This article is about the form of government. For the political ideology, see Republicanism. For other uses, see Republic
(disambiguation).Part of the Politics seriesBasic forms of governmentPower structureSeparation * Associated state
 * Dominion
 * Chiefdom

Federalism * Federation
 * Confederation
 * Devolution

Integration * Empire
 * Hegemony
 * Unitary state

Administrative divisionPower sourceDemocracy
power of many * Direct
 * Representative
 * Semi
 * others

Oligarchy
power of few * Aristocracy
 * Military junta
 * Plutocracy
 * Stratocracy
 * Timocracy
 * Theocracy
 * Kritarchy
 * Particracy

Autocracy
power of one * Despotism
 * Illiberal democracy
 * Semi-authoritarian
 * Dictatorship

Hybrids * Anocracy

Power ideologyMonarchy  vs. Republic
socio-political ideologies * Absolute
 * Constitutional
   
 * Directorial
 * Legalist
   
 * Parliamentary
 * Semi-presidential
 * Presidential

Authoritarian  vs. Libertarian
socio-economic ideologies * Capitalism
 * Colonialism
 * Communism
 * Distributism
 * Feudalism
 * Socialism

Anarchism  vs. Statism
civil-liberties ideologies * Anarchy
 * Minarchy
 * Totalitarianism

Global  vs. Local
geo-cultural ideologies * Central
 * City-state
 * National unity
 * World

Politics portal * v
 * t
 * e

A republic  (from Latin: res publica) is a sovereign state  or country[1]  which is organized with a form of government  in which
power resides in elected individuals representing the citizen body[2][3]  and government leaders exercise power according to the 
rule of law. In modern times, the definition of a republic is commonly referred to a government which excludes a monarch.[3][4] 
Currently, 147 of the world's 206 sovereign states  use the word "republic" as part of their official names; not all of these are
republics in the sense of having elected governments, nor do all nations with elected governments use the word "republic" in their
names.

Both modern and ancient republics vary widely in their ideology and composition. In the classical and medieval  period of Europe,
many states were fashioned on the Roman Republic, which referred to the governance of the city of Rome, between it having kings
and emperors. The Italian medieval and Renaissance  political tradition, today referred to as "civic humanism", is sometimes
considered to derive directly from Roman republicans such as Sallust  and Tacitus. However, Greek-influenced Roman authors, such
as Polybius[5]  and Cicero, sometimes also used the term as a translation for the Greek politeia  which could mean regime
generally, but could also be applied to certain specific types of regime which did not exactly correspond to that of the Roman
Republic. Republics were not equated with classical democracies such as Athens, but had a democratic aspect.

Republics became more common in the Western world starting in the late 18th century, eventually displacing absolute monarchy  as
the most common form of government in Europe. In modern republics the executive is legitimized both by a constitution  and by
popular suffrage. In his work, "The Spirit of the Laws", Montesquieu  classified both democracies, where all the people have a
share in rule, and aristocracies, where only some of the people rule, as republican forms of government.[6]

Most often a republic is a single sovereign state, but there are also sub-sovereign state entities that are referred to as
republics, or which have governments that are described as 'republican' in nature. For instance, Article IV  of the United States
Constitution  "guarantee[s] to every State in this Union a Republican form of Government".[7]  In contrast, the Soviet Union  was 
constitutionally  described as a "federal multinational state", composed of 15 republics, two of which – Ukraine  and Belarus  –
had their own seats at the United Nations.



ETYMOLOGY
The term originates as the Latin translation of Greek  word politeia. Cicero, among other Latin writers, translated politeia  as 
res publica  and it was in turn translated by Renaissance scholars as republic  (or similar terms in various western European
languages).[citation needed]

The term politeia  can be translated as form of government, polity, or regime, and is therefore not always a word for a specific
type of regime as the modern word republic is. (One of Plato's major works on political science was titled Politeia  and in
English it is thus known as The Republic. However, apart from the title, in modern translations of The Republic, alternative
translations of politeia  are also used.[8]) However, in Book III of his Politics  (1279a), Aristotle was apparently the first
classical writer to state that the term politeia  can be used to refer more specifically to one type of politeia: "When the
citizens at large govern for the public good, it is called by the name common to all governments (to koinon onoma pasōn tōn
politeiōn), government (politeia)". And also amongst classical Latin, the term "republic" can be used in a general way to refer to
any regime, or in a specific way to refer to governments which work for the public good.

In medieval Northern Italy, a number of city states had commune  or signoria  based governments. In the late Middle Ages, writers,
such as Giovanni Villani, began writing about the nature of these states and the differences from other types of regime. They used
terms such as libertas populi, a free people, to describe the states. The terminology changed in the 15th century as the renewed
interest in the writings of Ancient Rome  caused writers to prefer using classical terminology. To describe non-monarchical states
writers, most importantly Leonardo Bruni, adopted the Latin phrase res publica.[9]

While Bruni and Machiavelli  used the term to describe the states of Northern Italy, which were not monarchies, the term res
publica  has a set of interrelated meanings in the original Latin. The term can quite literally be translated as "public matter".
[10]  It was most often used by Roman writers to refer to the state and government, even during the period of the Roman Empire.
[11]

In subsequent centuries, the English word commonwealth  came to be used as a translation of res publica, and its use in English
was comparable to how the Romans used the term res publica.[12]  Notably, during The Protectorate  of Oliver Cromwell  the word 
commonwealth  was the most common term to call the new monarchless state, but the word republic  was also in common use.[13]

Presently, the term "republic" commonly means a system of government which derives its power from the people rather than from
another basis, such as heredity  or divine right.[citation needed]

HISTORY
While the philosophical terminology developed in classical Greece and Rome, as already noted by Aristotle there was already a long
history of city states with a wide variety of constitutions, not only in Greece but also in the Middle East. After the classical
period, during the Middle Ages, many free cities developed again, such as Venice.

CLASSICAL REPUBLICS
Main article: Classical republic
A map of the Roman RepublicThe modern type of "republic" itself is different from any type of state found in the classical world.[14][15]  Nevertheless,
there are a number of states of the classical era  that are today still called republics. This includes ancient Athens, Sparta 
and the Roman Republic. While the structure and governance of these states was very different from that of any modern republic,
there is debate about the extent to which classical, medieval, and modern republics form a historical continuum. J. G. A. Pocock 
has argued that a distinct republican tradition stretches from the classical world to the present.[10][16]  Other scholars
disagree.[10]  Paul Rahe, for instance, argues that the classical republics had a form of government with few links to those in
any modern country.[17]

The political philosophy of the classical republics have in any case had an influence on republican thought throughout the
subsequent centuries. Philosophers and politicians advocating for republics, such as Machiavelli, Montesquieu, Adams, and Madison,
relied heavily on classical Greek and Roman sources which described various types of regimes.

Aristotle's Politics  discusses various forms of government. One form Aristotle named politeia, which consisted of a mixture of
the other forms. He argued that this was one of the ideal forms of government. Polybius  expanded on many of these ideas, again
focusing on the idea of mixed government. The most important Roman work in this tradition is Cicero's De re publica.

Over time, the classical republics were either conquered by empires or became ones themselves. Most of the Greek republics were
annexed to the Macedonian Empire  of Alexander. The Roman Republic expanded dramatically conquering the other states of the
Mediterranean that could be considered republics, such as Carthage. The Roman Republic itself then became the Roman Empire.

OTHER ANCIENT REPUBLICS
Vaishali  was the capital  of the Vajjian Confederacy, an early republic.The term "republic" is not commonly used to refer to
pre-classical city states, especially if outside Europe and the area which was under Graeco-Roman influence.[10]  However some
early states outside Europe had governments that are sometimes today considered similar to republics.

In the ancient Near East, a number of cities of the Eastern Mediterranean  achieved collective rule. Arwad  has been cited as one
of the earliest known examples of a republic, in which the people, rather than a monarch, are described as sovereign.[18]  The 
Israelite  confederation of the era before the United Monarchy  has also been considered a type of republic.[10][19]  In Africa
the Axum Empire  was organized as a confederation ruled similarly to a royal republic.[20]  Similarly the Igbo  nation of what is
now Nigeria.[21]

The ancient Indian subcontinent  had a number of early republics known as Mahajanapadas.[22]  Mahajanapadas consisted of sixteen
oligarchic republics that existed during the sixth centuries BCE to fourth centuries BCE.[23][24]  Some Indian scholars, such as 
K.P. Jayaswal, have argued that a number of states in ancient India  had republican forms of government.[25][26][27]  There are no
surviving constitutions  or works of political philosophy  from this period in Indian history, but surviving religious texts  do
refer to a number of states having Gaṇa sangha, or council-based, as opposed to monarchical, governments.

ICELANDIC COMMONWEALTH
The Icelandic Commonwealth was established in 930 AD by refugees from Norway  who had fled the unification of that country under
King Harald Fairhair. The Commonwealth consisted of a number of clans run by chieftains, and the Althing  was a combination of
parliament and supreme court where disputes appealed from lower courts were settled, laws were decided, and decisions of national
importance were taken. One such example was the Christianisation of Iceland  in 1000, where the Althing decreed, in order to
prevent an invasion, that all Icelanders must be baptized, and forbade celebration of pagan rituals. Contrary to most states, the
Icelandic Commonwealth had no official leader.

In the early 13th century, the Age of the Sturlungs, the Commonwealth began to suffer from long conflicts between warring clans.
This, combined with pressure from the Norwegian king Haakon IV  for the Icelanders to re-join the Norwegian "family", led the
Icelandic chieftains to accept Haakon IV as king by the signing of the Gamli sáttmáli  ("Old Covenant") in 1262. This effectively
brought the Commonwealth to an end. The Althing, however, is still Iceland's parliament, almost 800 years later.[28]

MERCANTILE REPUBLICS
Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, Neptune  offers the wealth of the sea to Venice, 1748–50. This painting is an allegory of the power of
the Republic of Venice.In Europe new republics appeared in the late Middle Ages when a number of small states embraced republican
systems of government. These were generally small, but wealthy, trading states, like the Italian city-states  and the Hanseatic
League, in which the merchant class had risen to prominence. Knud Haakonssen has noted that, by the Renaissance, Europe was
divided with those states controlled by a landed elite being monarchies and those controlled by a commercial elite being
republics.[12]

Across Europe a wealthy merchant class developed in the important trading cities. Despite their wealth they had little power in
the feudal system  dominated by the rural land owners, and across Europe began to advocate for their own privileges and powers.
The more centralized states, such as France and England, granted limited city charters.

Beginning of the Republic of Metz. Election of the first Head-Alderman  in 1289, by Auguste Migette. Metz  was then a free
imperial city  of the Holy Roman Emperor.In the more loosely governed Holy Roman Empire, 51 of the largest towns became free imperial cities. While still under the
dominion of the Holy Roman Emperor  most power was held locally and many adopted republican forms of government.[29]  The same
rights to imperial immediacy were secured by the major trading cities of Switzerland. The towns and villages of alpine Switzerland 
 had, courtesy of geography, also been largely excluded from central control. Unlike Italy and Germany, much of the rural area was
thus not controlled by feudal barons, but by independent farmers who also used communal forms of government. When the Habsburgs 
tried to reassert control over the region both rural farmers and town merchants joined the rebellion. The Swiss  were victorious,
and the Swiss Confederacy  was proclaimed, and Switzerland has retained a republican form of government to the present.[19]

Italy was the most densely populated area of Europe, and also one with the weakest central government. Many of the towns thus
gained considerable independence and adopted commune forms of government. Completely free of feudal control, the Italian
city-states expanded, gaining control of the rural hinterland.[29]  The two most powerful were the Republic of Venice  and its
rival the Republic of Genoa. Each were large trading ports, and further expanded by using naval power to control large parts of
the Mediterranean. It was in Italy that an ideology advocating for republics first developed. Writers such as Bartholomew of Lucca
, Brunetto Latini, Marsilius of Padua, and Leonardo Bruni saw the medieval city-states as heirs to the legacy of Greece and Rome.

Two Russian cities with powerful merchant class—Novgorod  and Pskov—also adopted republican forms of government in 12th and 13th
centuries, respectively, which ended when the republics were conquered by Muscovy/Russia  at the end 15th – beginning of 16th
century.[30]

The dominant form of government for these early republics was control by a limited council of elite patricians. In those areas
that held elections, property qualifications or guild membership limited both who could vote and who could run. In many states no
direct elections were held and council members were hereditary or appointed by the existing council. This left the great majority
of the population without political power, and riots and revolts by the lower classes were common. The late Middle Ages saw more
than 200 such risings in the towns of the Holy Roman Empire.[31]  Similar revolts occurred in Italy, notably the Ciompi Revolt  in
Florence.

MERCANTILE REPUBLICS OUTSIDE OF EUROPE
Following the collapse of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum  and establishment of the Turkish  Anatolian Beyliks, the Ahiler  merchant
fraternities established a state centered on Ankara  that is sometimes compared to the Italian mercantile republics.

CALVINIST REPUBLICS
See also: European wars of religionWhile the classical writers had been the primary ideological source for the republics of Italy,
in Northern Europe, the Protestant Reformation  would be used as justification for establishing new republics.[32]  Most important
was Calvinist  theology, which developed in the Swiss Confederacy, one of the largest and most powerful of the medieval republics.
 John Calvin  did not call for the abolition of monarchy, but he advanced the doctrine that the faithful had the duty to overthrow
irreligious monarchs.[33]  Advocacy for republics appeared in the writings of the Huguenots  during the French Wars of Religion.
[34]

Calvinism played an important role in the republican revolts in England and the Netherlands. Like the city-states of Italy and the
Hanseatic League, both were important trading centres, with a large merchant class prospering from the trade with the New World.
Large parts of the population of both areas also embraced Calvinism. During the Dutch Revolt  (beginning in 1566), the Dutch
Republic  emerged from rejection of Spanish Habsburg  rule. However, the country did not adopt the republican form of government
immediately: in the formal declaration of independence (Act of Abjuration, 1581), the throne of king Philip  was only declared
vacant, and the Dutch magistrates asked the Duke of Anjou, queen Elizabeth of England  and prince William of Orange, one after
another, to replace Philip. It took until 1588 before the Estates  (the Staten, the representative assembly at the time) decided
to vest the sovereignty of the country in themselves.

In 1641 the English Civil War  began. Spearheaded by the Puritans  and funded by the merchants of London, the revolt was a
success, and King Charles I  was executed. In England James Harrington, Algernon Sidney, and John Milton  became some of the first
writers to argue for rejecting monarchy and embracing a republican form of government. The English Commonwealth  was short lived,
and the monarchy soon restored. The Dutch Republic continued in name until 1795, but by the mid-18th century the stadtholder  had
become a de facto  monarch. Calvinists were also some of the earliest settlers of the British and Dutch colonies of North America.

LIBERAL REPUBLICS
Liberal republics in early modern EuropeAn allegory of the Republic in Paris.Septinsular Republic  flag from the early 1800s.A
revolutionary Republican hand-written bill from the Stockholm riots during the Revolutions of 1848, reading: "Dethrone Oscar  he
is not fit to be a king: Long live the Republic! The Reform! down with the Royal house, long live Aftonbladet! death to the king /
Republic Republic the People. Brunkeberg  this evening". The writer's identity is unknown.Along with these initial republican
revolts, early modern Europe  also saw a great increase in monarchial power. The era of absolute monarchy  replaced the limited
and decentralized monarchies that had existed in most of the Middle Ages. It also saw a reaction against the total control of the
monarch as a series of writers created the ideology known as liberalism.

Most of these Enlightenment  thinkers were far more interested in ideas of constitutional monarchy  than in republics. The
Cromwell regime had discredited republicanism, and most thinkers felt that republics ended in either anarchy  or tyranny.[35] 
Thus philosophers like Voltaire  opposed absolutism while at the same time being strongly pro-monarchy.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau  and Montesquieu  praised republics, and looked on the city-states of Greece as a model. However, both also
felt that a nation-state like France, with 20 million people, would be impossible to govern as a republic. Rousseau admired the
republican experiment in Corsica  (1755-1769) and described his ideal political structure of small self-governing communes.
Montesquieu felt that a city-state should ideally be a republic, but maintained that a limited monarchy was better suited to a
large nation.

The American Revolution  began as a rejection only of the authority of the British Parliament  over the colonies, not of the
monarchy. The failure of the British monarch to protect the colonies from what they considered the infringement of their rights
to
representative government, the monarch's branding of those requesting redress as traitors, and his support for sending combat
troops to demonstrate authority resulted in widespread perception of the British monarchy as tyrannical. With the United States
Declaration of Independence  the leaders of the revolt firmly rejected the monarchy and embraced republicanism. The leaders of the
revolution were well versed in the writings of the French liberal thinkers, and also in history of the classical republics. John
Adams had notably written a book on republics throughout history. In addition, the widely distributed and popularly read-aloud
tract Common Sense, by Thomas Paine, succinctly and eloquently laid out the case for republican ideals and independence to the
larger public. The Constitution of the United States, ratified in 1789, created a relatively strong federal republic  to replace
the relatively weak confederation  under the first attempt at a national government with the Articles of Confederation and
Perpetual Union  ratified in 1783. The first ten amendments to the Constitution, called the United States Bill of Rights,
guaranteed certain natural rights  fundamental to republican ideals that justified the Revolution.

The French Revolution  was also not republican at its outset. Only after the Flight to Varennes  removed most of the remaining
sympathy for the king was a republic declared and Louis XVI  sent to the guillotine. The stunning success of France in the French
Revolutionary Wars  saw republics spread by force of arms across much of Europe as a series of client republics  were set up
across the continent. The rise of Napoleon  saw the end of the French First Republic  and her Sister Republics, each replaced by '

popular monarchies'. Throughout the Napoleonic period, the victors extinguished many of the oldest republics on the continent,
including the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa, and the Dutch Republic. They were eventually transformed into monarchies
or absorbed into neighbouring monarchies.

Outside Europe another group of republics was created as the Napoleonic Wars  allowed the states of Latin America to gain their
independence. Liberal ideology had only a limited impact on these new republics. The main impetus was the local European descended
 Creole  population in conflict with the Peninsulares  - governors sent from overseas. The majority of the population in most of
Latin America was of either African or Amerindian  descent, and the Creole elite had little interest in giving these groups power
and broad-based popular sovereignty. Simón Bolívar, both the main instigator of the revolts and one of its most important
theorists, was sympathetic to liberal ideals but felt that Latin America lacked the social cohesion for such a system to function
and advocated autocracy as necessary.

In Mexico this autocracy  briefly took the form of a monarchy in the First Mexican Empire. Due to the Peninsular War, the
Portuguese court was relocated to Brazil in 1808. Brazil gained independence  as a monarchy on September 7, 1822, and the Empire
of Brazil  lasted until 1889. In the other states various forms of autocratic republic existed until most were liberalized at the
end of the 20th century.[36]

European states in 1815.[37]
Monarchies (55) Republics (9)European states in 1914.[38]
Monarchies (22) Republics (4)European states in 1930.[39]
Monarchies (20) Republics (15)European states in 1950.[40]
Monarchies (13) Republics (21)European states in 2015.[41]
Monarchies (12) Republics (35)The French Second Republic  was created in 1848, but abolished by Napoleon III  who proclaimed himself Emperor in 1852. The 
French
Third Republic  was established in 1870, when a civil revolutionary committee refused to accept Napoleon III's surrender during
the Franco-Prussian War. Spain briefly became the First Spanish Republic  in 1873–4, but the monarchy was soon restored. By the
start of the 20th century France, Switzerland and San Marino remained the only republics in Europe. This changed when, after the
1908 Lisbon Regicide, the 5 October 1910 revolution  established the Portuguese Republic. This would encourage new republics
during and in the aftermath of World War I, when several of the largest European empires collapsed: the German Empire, 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, Russian Empire, and Ottoman Empire  were all replaced by republics. New states gained independence during
this turmoil, and many of these, such as Ireland, Poland, Finland  and Czechoslovakia, chose republican forms of government.
Following Greece's defeat in the Greco-Turkish War (1919–22), the monarchy was briefly replaced by the Second Hellenic Republic 
(1924–1935). In 1931, the proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic  (1931–1939) resulted in the Spanish Civil War  that would
be the prelude of World War II.

Republican ideas were spreading, especially in Asia. The United States began to have considerable influence in East Asia in the
later part of the 19th century, with Protestant  missionaries playing a central role. The liberal and republican writers of the
west also exerted influence. These combined with native Confucian  inspired political philosophy that had long argued that the
populace had the right to reject unjust government that had lost the Mandate of Heaven.

Two short-lived republics were proclaimed in East Asia, the Republic of Formosa  and the First Philippine Republic. China had seen
considerable anti-Qing sentiment, and a number of protest movements developed calling for constitutional monarchy. The most
important leader of these efforts was Sun Yat-sen, whose Three Principles of the People  combined American, European, and Chinese
ideas. The Republic of China  was proclaimed on January 1, 1912.

DECOLONIZATION
A map of the Commonwealth republicsIn the years following World War II, most of the remaining European colonies gained their
independence, and most became republics. The two largest colonial powers were France and the United Kingdom. Republican France
encouraged the establishment of republics in its former colonies. the United Kingdom attempted to follow the model it had for its
earlier settler colonies of creating independent Commonwealth realms  still linked under the same monarchy. While most of the
settler colonies and the smaller states of the Caribbean retained this system, it was rejected by the newly independent countries
in Africa and Asia, which revised their constitutions and became republics.

Britain followed a different model in the Middle East; it installed local monarchies in several colonies and mandates including 
Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, Yemen  and Libya. In subsequent decades revolutions and coups  overthrew a number of monarchs
and installed republics. Several monarchies remain, and the Middle East is the only part of the world where several large states
are ruled by monarchs with almost complete political control.[42]

SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
See also: People's Republic  and Socialist state
A poster that commemorates the permanent President of the Republic of China Yuan Shikai and the provisional President of the
RepublicIn the wake of the First World War, the Russian monarchy fell during the Russian Revolution. The Russian Provisional Government 
was established in its place on the lines of a liberal republic, but this was overthrown by the Bolsheviks  who went on to
establish the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. This was the first republic established under Marxist-Leninist  ideology.
Communism was wholly opposed to monarchy, and became an important element of many republican movements during the 20th century.
The Russian Revolution spread into Mongolia, and overthrew its theocratic monarchy in 1924. In the aftermath of the Second World
War the communists gradually gained control of Romania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Hungary  and Albania, ensuring that the states were
reestablished as socialist republics rather than monarchies.

Communism also intermingled with other ideologies. It was embraced by many national liberation movements during decolonization. In
Vietnam, communist republicans pushed aside the Nguyễn Dynasty, and monarchies in neighbouring Laos  and Cambodia  were overthrown
by communist movements in the 1970s. Arab socialism  contributed to a series of revolts and coups that saw the monarchies of Egypt
, Iraq, Libya, and Yemen ousted. In Africa Marxist-Leninism and African socialism  led to the end of monarchy and the proclamation
of republics in states such as Burundi  and Ethiopia.

ISLAMIC REPUBLICS
Main article: Islamic republicIslamic political philosophy has a long history of opposition to absolute monarchy, notably in the
work of Al-Farabi. Sharia law  took precedence over the will of the ruler, and electing rulers by means of the Shura  was an
important doctrine. While the early caliphate  maintained the principles of an elected ruler, later states became hereditary or
military dictatorships though many maintained some pretense of a consultative shura.

None of these states are typically referred to as republics. The current usage of republic in Muslim countries is borrowed from
the western meaning, adopted into the language in the late 19th century.[43]  The 20th century saw republicanism become an
important idea in much of the Middle East, as monarchies were removed in many states of the region. Iraq became a secular state.
Some nations, such as Indonesia  and Azerbaijan, began as secular. In Iran, the 1979 revolution  overthrew the monarchy and
created an Islamic republic  based on the ideas of Islamic democracy.

HEAD OF STATE
STRUCTURE
With no monarch, most modern republics use the title president  for the head of state. Originally used to refer to the presiding
officer of a committee or governing body in Great Britain the usage was also applied to political leaders, including the leaders
of some of the Thirteen Colonies  (originally Virginia in 1608); in full, the "President of the Council."[44]  The first republic
to adopt the title was the United States of America. Keeping its usage as the head of a committee the President of the
Continental
Congress  was the leader of the original congress. When the new constitution was written the title of President of the United
States  was conferred on the head of the new executive branch.

If the head of state of a republic is also the head of government, this is called a presidential system. There are a number of
forms of presidential government. A full-presidential system has a president with substantial authority and a central political
role.

In other states the legislature is dominant and the presidential role is almost purely ceremonial and apolitical, such as in
Germany and India. These states are parliamentary republics  and operate similarly to constitutional monarchies with 
parliamentary
systems  where the power of the monarch is also greatly circumscribed. In parliamentary systems the head of government, most often
titled prime minister, exercises the most real political power. Semi-presidential systems  have a president as an active head of
state, but also have a head of government with important powers.

The rules for appointing the president and the leader of the government, in some republics permit the appointment of a president
and a prime minister who have opposing political convictions: in France, when the members of the ruling cabinet  and the president
come from opposing political factions, this situation is called cohabitation.

In some countries, like Switzerland, Bosnia and Herzegovina  and San Marino, the head of state is not a single person but a
committee (council) of several persons holding that office. The Roman Republic had two consuls, elected for a one year-term by the
 comitia centuriata, consisting of all adult, freeborn males who could prove citizenship.

ELECTIONS
In liberal democracies  presidents are elected, either directly by the people or indirectly by a parliament or council. Typically
in presidential and semi-presidential systems the president is directly elected by the people, or is indirectly elected as done in
the United States. In that country the president is officially elected by an electoral college, chosen by the States, all of which
do so by direct election of the electors. The indirect election of the president through the electoral college conforms to the
concept of republic as one with a system of indirect election. In the opinion of some, direct election confers legitimacy  upon
the president and gives the office much of its political power.[45]  However, this concept of legitimacy differs from that
expressed in the United States Constitution which established the legitimacy of the United States president as resulting from the
signing of the Constitution by nine states.[46]  The idea that direct election is required for legitimacy also contradicts the
spirit of the Great Compromise, whose actual result was manifest in the clause[47]  that provides voters in smaller states with
slightly more representation in presidential selection than those in large states.

In states with a parliamentary system the president is usually elected by the parliament. This indirect election subordinates the
president to the parliament, and also gives the president limited legitimacy and turns most presidential powers into reserve
powers  that can only be exercised under rare circumstance. There are exceptions where elected presidents have only ceremonial
powers, such as in Ireland.

AMBIGUITIES
The distinction between a republic and a monarchy is not always clear. The constitutional monarchies  of the former British Empire
and Western Europe today have almost all real political power vested in the elected representatives, with the monarchs only
holding either theoretical powers, no powers or rarely used reserve powers. Real legitimacy for political decisions comes from the
elected representatives and is derived from the will of the people. While hereditary monarchies remain in place, political power
is derived from the people as in a republic. These states are thus sometimes referred to as crowned republics.[48]

Terms such as liberal republic  are also used to describe all of the modern liberal democracies.[49]

There are also self-proclaimed republics that act similarly to monarchies with absolute power vested in the leader and passed down
from father to son. North Korea and Syria are two notable examples where a son has inherited political control. Neither of these
states are officially monarchies. There is no constitutional requirement that power be passed down within one family, but it has
occurred in practice.

There are also elective monarchies  where ultimate power is vested in a monarch, but the monarch is chosen by some manner of
election. A current example of such a state is Malaysia  where the Yang di-Pertuan Agong  is elected every five years by the 
Conference of Rulers  composed of the nine hereditary rulers of the Malay states, and the Vatican City-State, where the pope  is
selected by cardinal-electors, currently all cardinals  under a specific age. While rare today, elective monarchs were common in
the past. The Holy Roman Empire is an important example, where each new emperor was chosen by a group of electors. Islamic states
also rarely employed primogeniture, instead relying on various forms of election to choose a monarch's successor.

The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth  had an elective monarchy, with a wide suffrage of some 500,000 nobles. The system, known as
the Golden Liberty, had developed as a method for powerful landowners to control the crown. The proponents of this system looked
to classical examples, and the writings of the Italian Renaissance, and called their elective monarchy a rzeczpospolita, based on 
res publica.

SUB-NATIONAL REPUBLICS
This section does not cite  any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  (June 2015)  (Learn how and when to remove this template message)In general being a
republic also implies sovereignty  as for the state to be ruled by the people it cannot be controlled by a foreign power. There
are important exceptions to this, for example, republics in the Soviet Union  were member states which had to meet three criteria
to be named republics:

 1. be on the periphery of the Soviet Union so as to be able to take advantage of their theoretical right to secede;
 2. be economically strong enough to be self-sufficient upon secession; and
 3. be named after at least one million people of the ethnic group which should make up the majority population of said republic.

It is sometimes argued that the former Soviet Union was also a supra-national republic, based on the claim that the member states
were different nations.

Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia  (and earlier names) was a federal entity composed of six republics (Socialist
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Slovenia). Each republic had its parliament,
government, institute of citizenship, constitution, etc... but certain functions were delegated to the federation (army, monetary
matters). Each republic also had a right of self-determination according to the conclusions of the second session of the AVNOJ 
and according to the federal constitution.

States of the United States are required, like the federal government, to be republican in form, with final authority resting with
the people. This was required because the states were intended to create and enforce most domestic laws, with the exception of
areas delegated to the federal government and prohibited to the states. The founding fathers of the country intended most domestic
laws to be handled by the states. Requiring the states to be a republic in form was seen as protecting the citizens' rights and
preventing a state from becoming a dictatorship or monarchy, and reflected unwillingness on the part of the original 13 states
(all independent republics) to unite with other states that were not republics. Additionally, this requirement ensured that only
other republics could join the union.

In the example of the United States, the original 13 British colonies  became independent  states after the American Revolution,
each having a republican form of government. These independent states initially formed a loose confederation called the United
States and then later formed the current United States by ratifying the current U.S. Constitution, creating a union  of sovereign
states  with the union or federal  government also being a republic. Any state joining the union later was also required to be a
republic.

OTHER MEANINGS
POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
Main article: RepublicanismThe term republic  originated from the writers of the Renaissance as a descriptive term for states that were not monarchies. These
writers, such as Machiavelli, also wrote important prescriptive works describing how such governments should function. These ideas
of how a government and society should be structured is the basis for an ideology known as classical republicanism  or civic
humanism. This ideology is based on the Roman Republic and the city states of Ancient Greece and focuses on ideals such as civic
virtue, rule of law, and mixed government.[50]

This understanding of a republic as a distinct form of government from a liberal democracy  is one of the main theses of the
Cambridge School of historical analysis.[51]  This grew out of the work of J. G. A. Pocock  who in 1975 argued that a series of
scholars had expressed a consistent set of republican ideals. These writers included Machiavelli, Milton, Montesquieu, and the
founders of the United States of America.

Pocock argued that this was an ideology with a history and principles distinct from liberalism.[52]  These ideas were embraced by
a number of different writers, including Quentin Skinner, Philip Pettit[53]  and Cass Sunstein. These subsequent writers have
further explored the history of the idea, and also outlined how a modern republic should function.

UNITED STATES
Main article: Republicanism in the United StatesA distinct set of definitions for the word republic  evolved in the United States. In common parlance, a republic is a state that
does not practice direct democracy  but rather has a government indirectly controlled by the people. This understanding of the
term was originally developed by James Madison, and notably employed in Federalist Paper No. 10. This meaning was widely adopted
early in the history of the United States, including in Noah Webster's dictionary of 1828. It was a novel meaning to the term;
representative democracy was not an idea mentioned by Machiavelli and did not exist in the classical republics.[54]  Also, there
is evidence that contemporaries of Madison considered the meaning of the word to reflect the definition found elsewhere, as is the
case with a quotation of Benjamin Franklin  taken from the notes of James McHenry  where the question is put forth, "a Republic or
a Monarchy?"[55]

The term republic  does not appear in the Declaration of Independence, but does appear in Article IV of the Constitution which
"guarantee[s] to every State in this Union a Republican form of Government." What exactly the writers of the constitution felt
this should mean is uncertain. The Supreme Court, in Luther v. Borden  (1849), declared that the definition of republic  was a "
political question" in which it would not intervene. In two later cases, it did establish a basic definition. In United States v.
Cruikshank  (1875), the court ruled that the "equal rights of citizens" were inherent to the idea of a republic.

However, the term republic  is not synonymous with the republican form. The republican form is defined as one in which the powers
of sovereignty are vested in the people and are exercised by the people, either directly, or through representatives chosen by the
people, to whom those powers are specially delegated. In re Duncan, 139 U.S. 449, 11 S.Ct. 573, 35 L.Ed. 219; Minor v. Happersett,
88 U.S. (21 Wall.) 162, 22 L.Ed. 627. [56]

Beyond these basic definitions the word republic  has a number of other connotations. W. Paul Adams observes that republic  is
most often used in the United States as a synonym for state or government, but with more positive connotations than either of
those terms.[57]  Republicanism is often referred to as the founding ideology of the United States. Traditionally scholars
believed this American republicanism was a derivation of the classical liberal ideologies of John Locke  and others developed in
Europe.

A political philosophy of republicanism that formed during the Renaissance period, and initiated by Machiavelli, was thought to
have had little impact on the founders of the United States. In the 1960s and 1970s a revisionist school[citation needed]  led by
the likes of Bernard Bailyn  began to argue that republicanism was just as or even more important than liberalism in the creation
of the United States.[58]  This issue is still much disputed and scholars like Isaac Kramnick  completely reject this view.[59]

SEE ALSO
 * Commonwealth
 * Democracy
 * Democratic republic
 * Free state
 * List of republics
 * Index: Republics
 * Republicanism
 * Republics of Russia
 * Guarantee Clause  of the U.S. Constitution

REFERENCES
 1.  ^  "Republic - Definition of Republic by Merriam-Webster".
 2.  ^  "republic - government". Encyclopedia Britannica.
 3.  ^ a  b  "Republic". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved August 14,  2010.
 4.  ^  "republic", WordNet 3.0, Dictionary.com, retrieved 20 March  2009
 5.  ^  Everitt, Anthony (2012). The Rise of Rome. New York: Random House. p. 125. ISBN9781400066636.
 6.  ^  Montesquieu, Spirit of the Laws, Bk. II, ch. 2–3.
 7.  ^  "Transcript of the Constitution of the United States - Official Text".
 8.  ^  Bloom, Allan. The Republic. Basic Books, 1991. pp. 439–440
 9.  ^  Rubinstein, Nicolai. "Machiavelli and Florentine Republican Experience" in Machiavelli and Republicanism  Cambridge
     University Press, 1993.
 10. ^ a  b  c  d  e  "Republic"j, New Dictionary of the History of Ideas. Ed. Maryanne Cline Horowitz. Vol. 5. Detroit: Charles
     Scribner's Sons, 2005. p. 2099
 11. ^  Lewis, Charlton T.; Charles Short (1879). "res, II.K". A Latin Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Retrieved 
     August 14,  2010.
 12. ^ a  b  Haakonssen, Knud. "Republicanism." A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy. Robert E. Goodin and Philip
     Pettit. eds. Cambridge: Blackwell, 1995.
 13. ^  Everdell (2000)  p. xxiii.
 14. ^  Nippel, Wilfried. "Ancient and Modern Republicanism." The Invention of the Modern Republic  ed. Biancamaria Fontana.
     Cambridge University Press, 1994 pg. 6
 15. ^  Reno, Jeffrey. "republic." International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences  pg. 184
 16. ^  Pocock, J.G.A. The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition  (1975; new
     ed. 2003)
 17. ^  Paul A. Rahe, Republics, Ancient and Modern, three volumes, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1994.
 18. ^  Martin Bernal, Black Athena Writes Back  (Durham: Duke University Press, 2001), 359.
 19. ^ a  b  Everdell (2000)
 20. ^  UNESCO World Heritage Centre. "Aksum".
 21. ^  "Concepts of Democracy and Democratization in Africa Revisited". Paper presented at the Fourth Annual Kent State
     University Symposium on Democracy. by Apollos O. Nwauwa
 22. ^  16 Mahajanapadas - Sixteen Mahajanapadas, 16 Maha Janapadas India, Maha Janapada Ancient India. Iloveindia.com. Retrieved
     on 2013-07-12.
 23. ^  Anguttara Nikaya I. p 213; IV. pp 252, 256, 261.
 24. ^  Singh, Upinder (2008). A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century. Delhi:
     Pearson Education. pp. 260–4. ISBN978-81-317-1120-0.
 25. ^  http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9074639/Vaisali  Vaisali, Encyclopædia Britannica
 26. ^  Kulke, Hermann; Dietmar Rothermund (2004). A history of India. Routledge. p. 57. ISBN0-415-32919-1.
 27. ^  Sharma, RS. Aspects of Political Ideas and Institutions in Ancient India.  Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 1999 pg. xxix
 28. ^  Chu, Henry (April 2, 2011). "Iceland seeks to become sanctuary for free speech". Los Angeles Times.
 29. ^ a  b  Finer, Samuel. The History of Government from the Earliest Times  Oxford University Press, 1999. pp. 950–955.
 30. ^  Ferdinand Joseph Maria Feldbrugge. Law in Medieval Russia, IDC Publishers, 2009
 31. ^  Finer, pp. 955–956.
 32. ^  Finer, Samuel. The History of Government from the Earliest Times.  Oxford University Press, 1999. pg. 1020.
 33. ^  "Republicanism." Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment  pg. 435
 34. ^  "Introduction." Republicanism: a Shared European Heritage.  By Martin van Gelderen and Quentin Skinner. Cambridge
     University Press, 2002 pg. 1
 35. ^  "Republicanism." Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment  pg. 431
 36. ^  "Latin American Republicanism" New Dictionary of the History of Ideas. Ed. Maryanne Cline Horowitz. Vol. 5. Detroit:
     Charles Scribner's Sons, 2005.
 37. ^  The Ottoman Empire  and Russian Empire  are counted amongst Europe. Counted as republics are the Swiss Confederation, the 
     Free Cities of Hamburg, Bremen, Lübeck  and Frankfurt, the Most Serene Republic of San Marino, the Republic of Cospaia, the 
     Septinsular Republic  and the German Confederation; however, member states of the German Confederation are also separately
     counted (35 monarchies).
 38. ^  The Ottoman Empire  and Russian Empire  are counted amongst Europe.
 39. ^  The Republic of Turkey is counted amongst Europe, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics  as a single republic, the 
     Irish
     Free State  as an independent monarchy (see also Irish head of state from 1936 to 1949), Vatican City as an elective monarchy
     , the Kingdom of Hungary  as a nominal monarchy.
 40. ^  The Republic of Turkey  is counted amongst Europe, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics  as a single republic, the 
     Free
     Territory of Trieste  as an independent republic, Vatican City  as an elective monarchy, the Spanish State  as a nominal
     monarchy.
 41. ^  The Republic of Turkey  is counted amongst Europe, the Russian Federation  as a single republic, the Republic of Kosovo 
     (recognised by most other European states) as an independent republic, Vatican City  as an elective monarchy. The Republic
     of
     Azerbaijan, Georgia, Armenia  and Kazakhstan  are not shown on this map and excluded from the count. The Turkish Republic of
     Northern Cyprus  (recognised only by Turkey) and all other unrecognised states are excluded from the count.
 42. ^  Anderson, Lisa. "Absolutism and the Resilience of Monarchy in the Middle East." Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 106, No.
     1 (Spring, 1991), pp. 1–15
 43. ^  Bernard Lewis. "The Concept of an Islamic Republic" Die Welt des Islams, New Series, Vol. 4, Issue 1 (1955), pp. 1–9
 44. ^  OED, s. v.
 45. ^  "Presidential Systems" Governments of the World: A Global Guide to Citizens' Rights and Responsibilities.  Ed. C. Neal
     Tate. Vol. 4. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2006. p7-11.
 46. ^  Article VII, Constitution of the United States
 47. ^  Article II, Para 2, Constitution of the United States
 48. ^  The novelist and essayist H. G. Wells  regularly used the term crowned republic to describe the United Kingdom, for
     instance in his work A Short History of the World. Alfred, Lord Tennyson  in his poem Idylls of the King.
 49. ^  Dunn, John. "The Identity of the Bourgeois Liberal Republic." The Invention of the Modern Republic. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1994.
 50. ^  "Republicanism" Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.  Jun 19, 2006
 51. ^  McCormick, John P. "Machiavelli against Republicanism: On the Cambridge School's 'Guicciardinian Moments'" Political
     Theory, Vol. 31, No. 5 (Oct., 2003), pp. 615–643
 52. ^  Pocock, J. G. A The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition  Princeton:
     1975;2003
 53. ^  Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government, NY: Oxford U.P., 1997, ISBN 0-19-829083-7; Oxford:
     Clarendon Press, 1997.
 54. ^  Everdell (2000)  pg. 6
 55. ^  "1593. Benjamin Franklin (1706-90). Respectfully Quoted: A Dictionary of Quotations. 1989".
 56. ^  GOVERNMENT (Republican Form of Government)- One in which the powers of sovereignty are vested in the people and are
     exercised by the people ... directly ... Black's Law Dictionary, Sixth Edition, P. 695
 57. ^  W. Paul Adams "Republicanism in Political Rhetoric Before 1776." Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 85, No. 3 (Sep., 1970),
     pp. 397–421
 58. ^  Bailyn, Bernard. The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
     1967.
 59. ^  Kramnick, Isaac. Republicanism and Bourgeois Radicalism: Political Ideology in Late Eighteenth-Century England and
     America.  Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990.

FURTHER READING
 * Martin van Gelderen & Quentin Skinner, eds., Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, v1, Republicanism and Constitutionalism
   in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press., 2002
 * Martin van Gelderen & Quentin Skinner, eds., Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, v2, The Values of Republicanism in
   Early Modern Europe, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 2002
 * Willi Paul Adams, “Republicanism in Political Rhetoric before 1776,” Political Science Quarterly  85(1970), p397-421.
 * Joyce Appleby, “Republicanism in Old and New Contexts,” in William & Mary Quarterly, 3rd series, 43(January, 1986), p3-34.
 * Joyce Appleby, ed., “Republicanism” issue of American Quarterly  37(Fall, 1985).
 * Sarah Barber, Regicide and Republicanism: Politics and Ethics in the English Republic, 1646-1649, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
   University Press, 1998.
 * Gisela Bock, Quentin Skinner & Maurizio Viroli, eds., Machiavelli and Republicanism, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 1990.
 * Everdell, William R. (2000), The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans  (2nd ed.), Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press
 * Eric Gojosso, Le concept de république en France (XVIe -XVIIIe siècle), Aix/Marseille, 1998, pp205–245.
 * James Hankins, "Exclusivist Republicanism and the Non-Monarchical Republic," Political Theory  38.4 (August 2010), 452-482.
 * Frédéric Monera, L'idée de République et la jurisprudence du Conseil constitutionnel  — Paris: L.G.D.J., 2004 Fnac, LGDJ.fr
 * Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997, pp. x and 304.
 * J. G. A. Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition, Princeton:
   Princeton University Press, 1975
 * J. G. A. Pocock, “Between Gog and Magog: The Republican Thesis and the Ideologia Americana,” Journal of the History of Ideas 
   48(1987), p<341>
 * J. G. A. Pocock, "The Machiavellian Moment  Revisited: A Study in History and Ideology” Journal of Modern History  53(1981)
 * Paul A. Rahe, Republics Ancient and Modern: Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution, 3v., Chapel Hill: U. of North
   Carolina Press 1992, 1994.
 * Jagdish P. Sharma, Republics in ancient India, c. 1500 B.C.-500 B.C., 1968
 * David Wootton, ed., Republicanism, Liberty, and Commercial Society, 1649-1776  (The Making of Modern Freedom series), Stanford,
   CA: Stanford University Press, 1994.

• Thomas Corwin, Senate Speech Against the Mexican War-Congressional Globe 1847

Speech of U.S. Senator against the Mexican–American War characterizing it as imperialist and presidentialEXTERNAL LINKS
 * William R. Everdell, “From State to Freestate: The Meaning of the Word Republic from Jean Bodin to John Adams”  (7th ISECS,
   Budapest, 7/31/87) in Valley Forge Journal, June, 1991

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Republic.Wikimedia Commons has media related to Republics.Look up republic  in Wiktionary,
the free dictionary.Wikiquote has quotations related to: RepublicAuthority control * LCCN: sh85112978
 * GND: 4177823-6"USSR", "CCCP", and "Soviet" redirect here. For other uses, see USSR (disambiguation), CCCP (disambiguation), and Soviet
(disambiguation).Union of Soviet Socialist RepublicsСоюз Советских Социалистических Республик
Soyuz Sovetskikh Sotsialisticheskikh Respublik1922–1991[1]FlagState EmblemMotto
Пролетарии всех стран, соединяйтесь!
(Translit.: Proletarii vsekh stran, soyedinyaytes'!)
English: Workers of the world, unite!
(literally: Proletarians of all countries, unite!)Anthem
"The Internationale"
(1922–1944)
"State Anthem of the Soviet Union"
(1944–1991)The Soviet Union after World War II, not including aligned countries.CapitalMoscowLanguagesRussianReligionNone (state
atheism)[2]  (see text)DemonymSoviet, RussianGovernmentFederal  Marxist–Leninist  one-party  socialist state[3][4][5][6]  (until
1990)
Federal  semi-presidential  republic  (after 1990)General Secretary •1922–1952Joseph Stalin  (first) •1991Vladimir Ivashko  (last)

Head of state •1922–1938Mikhail Kalinin  (first) •1988–1991Mikhail Gorbachev  (last)Head of government •1922–1924Vladimir Lenin  
(first) •1991Ivan Silayev  (last)LegislatureSupreme Soviet •Upper houseSoviet of the Union •Lower houseSoviet of Nationalities
Historical eraInterwar period  / World War II  / Cold War •Treaty of Creation30 December 1922 •Constitution adopted9 October 1977
 •Union dissolved26 December 1991[1]Area •199122,402,200 km² (8,649,538 sq mi)Population •1991 est.293,047,571Density13.1 /km² 
(33.9 /sq mi)CurrencySoviet ruble  (руб) (SUR)Internet TLD.su1Calling code+7Preceded bySucceeded byRussian SFSRTranscaucasian SFSR

Ukrainian SSRByelorussian SSRBukharan People's Soviet RepublicKhorezm People's Soviet RepublicEstoniaLatviaLithuaniaRussiaUkraine
BelarusArmeniaAzerbaijanEstoniaGeorgiaKazakhstanKyrgyzstanLatviaLithuaniaMoldovaTajikistanTurkmenistanUzbekistanToday part of
Russia
Ukraine
Belarus
Abkhazia3
Armenia
Azerbaijan
China  (parts disputed)
Estonia
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova
Mongolia
Nagorno-Karabakh Republic3
South Ossetia3
Tajikistan
Transnistria3
Turkmenistan
UzbekistanNotes 1. ^  Assigned on 19 September 1990, existing onwards.
 2. ^  Constituent republics had right to declare their own official languages
 3. ^  States with limited recognition.

For details on the succession of states  see below.

Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "longm" (this message is shown only in preview).
Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "currency_code" (this message is shown only in
preview).Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "longEW" (this message is shown only in
preview).Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "largest_city" (this message is shown only
in preview).Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "utc_offset" (this message is shown only
in preview).Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "longd" (this message is shown only in
preview).Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "latm" (this message is shown only in
preview).Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "latNS" (this message is shown only in
preview).Warning:  Page using Template:Infobox former country  with unknown parameter "latd" (this message is shown only in
preview).The Soviet Union  (Russian: Сове́тский Сою́з, tr.  Sovetskiy Soyuz; IPA:[sɐ'vʲetskʲɪj sɐˈjʉs]), officially the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics  (Russian: Сою́з Сове́тских Социалисти́ческих Респу́блик, tr.  Soyuz Sovetskikh Sotsialisticheskikh Respublik;
 IPA:[sɐˈjus sɐˈvʲɛtskʲɪx sətsɨəlʲɪsˈtʲitɕɪskʲɪx rʲɪˈspublʲɪk] (  listen)), abbreviated to USSR  (Russian: СССР, tr.  SSSR), was a
 socialist state  on the Eurasian  continent that existed from 1922 to 1991. A union  of multiple subnational Soviet republics,
its government  and economy  were highly centralized. The Soviet Union was a one-party  federation, governed by the Communist
Party  with Moscow  as its capital.

The Soviet Union had its roots in the October Revolution  of 1917, when the Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, overthrew the 
provisional government  that had replaced the Tsar. They established the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic (renamed 
Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic  in 1936), beginning a civil war  between the revolutionary "Reds" and the
counter-revolutionary "Whites." The Red Army  entered several territories of the former Russian Empire  and helped local
Communists take power through soviets, which nominally acted on behalf of workers and peasants. In 1922, the Communists were
victorious, forming the Soviet Union with the unification of the Russian, Transcaucasian, Ukrainian, and Byelorussian  republics.
Following Lenin's death in 1924, a troika  and a brief power struggle, Joseph Stalin  came to power in the mid-1920s. Stalin
suppressed all political opposition to his rule, committed the state ideology to Marxism–Leninism  (which he created), and
initiated a centrally planned command economy. As a result, the country underwent a period of rapid industrialization and 
collectivization  which laid the foundation for its victory  in World War II  and post-war dominance of Eastern Europe. Stalin
also fomented political paranoia, and conducted the Great Purge  to remove opponents of his from the Communist Party  through the
mass arbitrary arrest of many people (military leaders, Communist Party members, and ordinary citizens alike) who were then sent
to correctional labor camps  or sentenced to death.

Shortly before World War II, Stalin signed the non-aggression pact  with Nazi Germany, after which the two countries invaded
Poland  in September 1939. In June 1941 the Germans invaded, opening the largest and bloodiest theater of war  in history. Soviet
war casualties  accounted for the highest proportion of the conflict in the cost of acquiring the upper hand over Axis  forces at
intense battles such as Stalingrad. Soviet forces eventually captured Berlin  in 1945. The territory overtaken by the Red Army
became satellite states  of the Eastern Bloc. The Cold War  emerged by 1947 as the Soviet bloc confronted the Western states that
united in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization  in 1949.

Following Stalin's death in 1953, a period of political and economic liberalization, known as "de-Stalinization" and "
Khrushchev's
Thaw", occurred under the leadership of Nikita Khrushchev. The country developed rapidly, as millions of peasants were moved into
industrialized cities. The USSR took an early lead in the Space Race  with the first ever satellite  and the first human
spaceflight. In the 1970s, there was a brief détente  of relations with the United States, but tensions resumed when the Soviet
Union deployed troops in Afghanistan  in 1979. The war drained economic resources and was matched by an escalation of American
military aid to Mujahideen  fighters.

In the mid-1980s, the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, sought to further reform and liberalize the economy through his
policies of glasnost  and perestroika. The goal was to preserve the Communist Party while reversing economic stagnation. The Cold
War ended during his tenure, and in 1989 Soviet satellite countries in Eastern Europe overthrew their respective communist
regimes. This led to the rise of strong nationalist and separatist movements inside the USSR as well. Central authorities
initiated a referendum—boycotted by the Baltic republics, Armenia, Georgia, and Moldova—which resulted in the majority of
participating citizens voting in favor of preserving the Union as a renewed federation. In August 1991, a coup d'état was
attempted  by Communist Party hardliners. It failed, with Russian President Boris Yeltsin  playing a high-profile role in facing
down the coup, resulting in the banning of the Communist Party. On 25 December 1991, Gorbachev resigned and the remaining twelve
constituent republics emerged from the dissolution of the Soviet Union  as independent post-Soviet states. The Russian Federation 
(formerly the Russian SFSR) assumed the Soviet Union's rights and obligations and has emerged as the recognized primary legal
successor of the Soviet Union.[7][8][9]



NAME
Soviet UnionThis article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the Soviet UnionLeadership * Leaders
 * President * (list
    * Vice President)
   
   
 * Collective leadership
 * State Council
 * Presidential Council

Communist Party * Congress
 * Central Committee
 * History

General Secretary * Politburo
 * Secretariat
 * Orgburo

Legislature * Congress of Soviets
   (Central Executive Committee)

Supreme Soviet * Soviet of the Union
 * Soviet of Nationalities
 * Presidium

Congress of People's Deputies *  * Speaker
    * 1989 Legislative election
   
   

GovernanceConstitution * Official names
 * 1924
 * 1936
 * 1977

Government * Ministries
 * State Committees
 * Executive Officer

Premiership * Cabinets
 * Council of People's Commissars
 * Council of Ministers
 * Cabinet of Ministers

Judiciary * Law
 * Supreme Court
 * People's Court
 * Procurator General

History1917–27 * Revolution
 * Civil War

1927–53 * World War II

1953–64 * Khrushchev Thaw

1964–82 * Era of Stagnation

1982–91 * Dissolution

Ideology * Soviet democracy
 * Marxism–Leninism
 *  * Leninism
    * Stalinism
    * Khrushchevism
   
   
 * De-Stalinization

SocietyEconomy * Agriculture
 * Consumer goods
 * Five-Year Plan
 * Kosygin reform
 * New Economic Policy
 * Science and technology
 * Era of Stagnation
 * Material balance planning
 * Transport

Culture * Demographics
 * Education
 * Family
 * Phraseology
 * Religion

Repression * Censorship
 * Censorship of images
 * Great Purge
 * Gulag system
 * Collectivization
 * Human rights
 * Ideological repression
 * Suppressed research
 * Political abuse of psychiatry
 * Political repression
 * Population transfer
 * Propaganda
 * Red Terror

 * Other countries
 * Atlas

 * v
 * t
 * e

Main article: Official names of the Soviet UnionThe word “Soviet” is derived from a Russian  word meaning council, assembly, advice, harmony, concord,[note 1]  and all ultimately
deriving from the Proto-Slavic verbal stem of *vět-iti "to inform", related to Slavic "věst" ("news"), English "wise", the root in
"ad-vis-or" (which came to English through French), or the Dutch "weten" (to know; cf. "wetenschap" = science). The word
"sovietnik" means councillor.[10]

A number of organizations in Russian history were called "council" (Russian: сове́т). For example, in the Russian Empire, the 
State Council, which functioned from 1810 to 1917, was referred to as a Council of Ministers after the revolt of 1905.[10]

From the beginning, the Soviet Union was the called the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics  from its founding, although all the
republics began as Socialist Soviet  and did not change to the other order until 1936. In addition, in the national languages of
several republics the word "Council/Conciliar" in the respective language was only quite late changed to an adaptation of the
Russian "Soviet" - and never in others, e.g., Ukraine.

The names of the Soviet Union are as follows in several languages of its 15 constituent republics:

 * Russian: Союз Советских Социалистических Республик; Soyuz Sovetskikh Sotsialisticheskikh Respublik
 * Ukrainian: Союз Радянських Соціалістичних Республік; Soyuz Radyans’kykh Socialistychnykh Respublik
 * Belarusian: Саюз Савецкіх Сацыялістычных Рэспублік; Sayuz Savieckaja Sacyjalistyčnaja Respublika
 * Uzbek: Совет Социалистик Республикалари Иттифоқи; Sovet Sotsialistik Respublikalari Ittifoqi
 * Kazakh: Кеңестік Социалистік Республикалар Одағы; Keñestik Socïalïstik Respwblïkalar Odağı
 * Georgian: სხუნუეფიშ სოციალისტური რესპუბლიკეფიშ რსხუ; skhunuepish sotsialist'uri resp'ublik'epish rskhu
 * Azerbaijani: Совет Сосиалист Республикалары Иттифагы; Sovet Sosialist Respublikaları İttifaqı
 * Lithuanian: Tarybų Socialistinių Respublikų Sąjunga
 * Moldovan: Униуня Републичилор советиче Сочиалисте; Uniunea Republicilor Sovietice Socialiste
 * Latvian: Padomju Sociālistisko Republiku Savienība
 * Kyrgyz: Советтик Социалисттик Республикалaр Союзу; Sovettik Socialisttik Respublikalar Soyuzu
 * Tajik: Иттиҳоди Ҷумҳуриҳои Шӯравии Сосиалистӣ; Ittihodi Chumhurihoi Shūravii Sosialistī
 * Armenian: Խորհրդային Սոցիալիստական Հանրապետությունների Միություն; Xorhrdayin Soc̕ialistakan Hanrapetowt̕yownneri Miowt̕yown
 * Turkmen: Совет Социалистик Республикалары Союзы; Sowet Sosialistik Respublikalary Soýuzy
 * Estonian: Nõukogude Sotsialistlike Vabariikide Liit

In some cases, due to the length of its name, the state was referred to as the "Soviet Union" or the "USSR" especially when used
in the Western  media. It was erroneously called "Russia" as well in some encyclopedic sources.

GEOGRAPHY, CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT
Main article: Geography of the Soviet UnionWith an area of 22,402,200 square kilometres (8,649,500 sq mi), the Soviet Union was
the world's largest country, a status that is retained by the Russian Federation.[11]  Covering a sixth of Earth's land surface,
its size was comparable to that of North America.[12]  The European  portion accounted for a quarter of the country's area, and
was the cultural and economic center. The eastern part in Asia  extended to the Pacific Ocean  to the east and Afghanistan  to the
south, and, except some areas in Central Asia, was much less populous. It spanned over 10,000 kilometres (6,200 mi) east to west
across 11 time zones, and over 7,200 kilometres (4,500 mi) north to south. It had five climate zones: tundra, taiga, steppes, 
desert, and mountains.

The Soviet Union had the world's longest border, like Russia, measuring over 60,000 kilometres (37,000 mi), or 11⁄2 
circumferences of Earth. Two-thirds of it was a coastline. Across the Bering Strait  was the United States. The Soviet Union
bordered Afghanistan, China, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Hungary, Iran, Mongolia, North Korea, Norway, Poland, Romania, and Turkey 
from 1945 to 1991.

The Soviet Union's highest mountain was Communism Peak (now Ismoil Somoni Peak) in Tajikistan, at 7,495 metres (24,590 ft). The
Soviet Union also included most of the world's largest lake, the Caspian Sea  (shared with Iran), and Lake Baikal, the world's
largest freshwater and deepest lake, an internal body of water in Russia.

HISTORY
Main article: History of the Soviet UnionThe last Russian Tsar, Nicholas II, ruled the Russian Empire  until his abdication in March 1917 in the aftermath of the February
Revolution, due in part to the strain of fighting in World War I, which lacked public support. A short-lived Russian Provisional
Government  took power, to be overthrown in the October Revolution  (N.S.  7 November 1917) by revolutionaries led by the 
Bolshevik  leader Vladimir Lenin.[13]

The Soviet Union was officially established in December 1922  with the union of the Russian, Ukrainian, Byelorussian, and 
Transcaucasian  Soviet republics, each ruled by local Bolshevik  parties. Despite the foundation of the Soviet state as a
federative entity of many constituent republics, each with its own political and administrative entities, the term "Soviet
Russia" – strictly applicable only to the Russian Federative Socialist Republic – was often applied to the entire country by
non-Soviet writers and politicians.

REVOLUTION AND FOUNDATION
Main article: History of Soviet Russia and the Soviet Union (1917–27)Modern revolutionary activity in the Russian Empire began
with the Decembrist revolt  of 1825. Although serfdom  was abolished in 1861, it was done on terms unfavorable to the peasants and
served to encourage revolutionaries. A parliament—the State Duma—was established in 1906 after the Russian Revolution of 1905, but
 Tsar Nicholas II  resisted attempts to move from absolute  to constitutional monarchy. Social unrest  continued and was
aggravated during World War I  by military defeat and food shortages in major Soviet cities.

Vladimir Lenin  addressing a crowd with Trotsky, 1920A spontaneous popular uprising in Petrograd, in response to the wartime decay of Russia's economy and morale, culminated in the 
February Revolution  and the toppling of the imperial government in March 1917. The tsarist autocracy  was replaced by the Russian
Provisional Government, which intended to conduct elections to the Russian Constituent Assembly  and to continue fighting on the
side of the Entente  in World War I.

At the same time, workers' councils, known in Russian  as "Soviets", sprang up across the country. The Bolsheviks, led by 
Vladimir
Lenin, pushed for socialist revolution  in the Soviets and on the streets. On 7 November 1917, the Red Guards stormed the Winter
Palace  in Petrograd, ending the rule of the Provisional Government and leaving all political power to the Soviets. This event
would later be known as the Great October Socialist Revolution. In December, the Bolsheviks signed an armistice  with the Central
Powers, though by February 1918, fighting had resumed. In March, the Soviets ended involvement in the war for good and signed the 
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.

A long and bloody Civil War  ensued between the Reds  and the Whites, starting in 1917 and ending in 1923 with the Reds' victory.
It included foreign intervention, the execution of the former tsar and his family, and the famine of 1921, which killed about five
million people.[14]  In March 1921, during a related conflict with Poland, the Peace of Riga  was signed, splitting disputed
territories in Belarus  and Ukraine  between the Republic of Poland  and Soviet Russia. Soviet Russia had to resolve similar
conflicts with the newly established Republic of Finland, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia, and the Republic of
Lithuania.

UNIFICATION OF REPUBLICS
The Russian SFSR as a part of the USSR in 1922.
The Russian SFSR as a part of the USSR after 1936 Russian territorial changes.On 28 December 1922, a conference of plenipotentiary
delegations from the Russian SFSR, the Transcaucasian SFSR, the Ukrainian SSR  and the Byelorussian SSR  approved the Treaty on
the Creation of the USSR[15]  and the Declaration of the Creation of the USSR, forming the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
[16]  These two documents were confirmed by the 1st Congress of Soviets  of the USSR and signed by the heads of the delegations,
[17]  Mikhail Kalinin, Mikhail Tskhakaya, Mikhail Frunze, Grigory Petrovsky, and Alexander Chervyakov,[18]  on 30 December 1922.
The formal proclamation was made from the stage of the Bolshoi Theatre.

On 1 February 1924, the USSR was recognized by the British Empire. The same year, a Soviet Constitution  was approved,
legitimizing the December 1922 union.

An intensive restructuring of the economy, industry and politics of the country began in the early days of Soviet power in 1917. A
large part of this was done according to the Bolshevik Initial Decrees, government documents signed by Vladimir Lenin. One of the
most prominent breakthroughs was the GOELRO plan, which envisioned a major restructuring of the Soviet economy based on total
electrification of the country. The plan was developed in 1920 and covered a 10 to 15-year period. It included construction of a
network of 30 regional power stations, including ten large hydroelectric power plants, and numerous electric-powered large
industrial enterprises.[19]  The plan became the prototype for subsequent Five-Year Plans  and was fulfilled by 1931.[20]

STALIN ERA
Main article: History of the Soviet Union (1927–53)Stalin and Nikolai Yezhov, head of the NKVD. After Yezhov was executed, he was 
edited out  of the image.From its creation, the government in the Soviet Union was based on the one-party rule  of the Communist Party (Bolsheviks).[21] 
After the economic policy of "War communism" during the Russian Civil War, as a prelude to fully developing socialism  in the
country, the Soviet government permitted some private enterprise to coexist alongside nationalized industry  in the 1920s and
total food requisition in the countryside was replaced by a food tax.

The stated purpose of the one-party state was to ensure that capitalist exploitation would not return to the Soviet Union and that
the principles of democratic centralism  would be most effective in representing the people's will in a practical manner. Debate
over the future of the economy provided the background for a power struggle in the years after Lenin's death in 1924. Initially,
Lenin was to be replaced by a "troika" consisting of Grigory Zinoviev  of the Ukrainian SSR, Lev Kamenev  of the Russian SFSR, and
 Joseph Stalin  of the Transcaucasian SFSR.

On 3 April 1922, Stalin was named the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Lenin had appointed Stalin the
head of the Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate, which gave Stalin considerable power. By gradually consolidating his influence
and isolating and outmaneuvering his rivals within the party, Stalin became the undisputed leader  of the Soviet Union and, by the
end of the 1920s, established totalitarian  rule. In October 1927, Grigory Zinoviev and Leon Trotsky  were expelled from the 
Central Committee  and forced into exile.

In 1928, Stalin introduced the First Five-Year Plan  for building a socialist economy. In place of the internationalism  expressed
by Lenin throughout the Revolution, it aimed to build Socialism in One Country. In industry, the state assumed control over all
existing enterprises and undertook an intensive program of industrialization. In agriculture, rather than adhering to the "lead by
example" policy advocated by Lenin,[22]  forced collectivization of farms  was implemented all over the country.

Famines  ensued, causing millions of deaths; surviving kulaks  were persecuted and many sent to Gulags  to do forced labour.[23] 
Social upheaval continued in the mid-1930s. Stalin's Great Purge  resulted in the execution or detainment of many "Old Bolsheviks"
who had participated in the October Revolution with Lenin. According to declassified Soviet archives, in 1937 and 1938, the NKVD 
arrested more than one and a half million people, of whom 681,692 were shot. Over those two years that averages to over one
thousand executions a day.[24]  According to historian Geoffrey Hosking, "...excess deaths during the 1930s as a whole were in the
range of 10–11 million."[25]  Yet despite the turmoil of the mid-to-late 1930s, the Soviet Union developed a powerful industrial
economy in the years before World War II.

1930S
"Strengthen working discipline in collective farms" – Soviet propaganda poster issued in Uzbekistan, 1933The early 1930s saw
closer cooperation between the West and the USSR. From 1932 to 1934, the Soviet Union participated in the World Disarmament
Conference. In 1933, diplomatic relations between the United States and the USSR were established when in November, the newly
elected President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt chose to formally recognize Stalin's Communist government and
negotiated a new trade agreement between the two nations.[26]  In September 1934, the Soviet Union joined the League of Nations.
After the Spanish Civil War  broke out in 1936, the USSR actively supported the Republican forces  against the Nationalists, who
were supported by Fascist Italy  and Nazi Germany.

In December 1936, Stalin unveiled a new Soviet Constitution. The constitution was seen as a personal triumph for Stalin, who on
this occasion was described by Pravda  as a "genius of the new world, the wisest man of the epoch, the great leader of communism."
[citation needed]  By contrast, Western historians and historians from former Soviet occupied countries have viewed the
constitution as a meaningless propaganda document.[citation needed]

Draft Constitution of the Soviet Union (1937)The late 1930s saw a shift towards the Axis powers. In 1939, almost a year after the United Kingdom and France  had concluded the 
Munich Agreement  with Germany, the USSR dealt with the Nazis as well, both militarily and economically during extensive talks.
The two countries concluded the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact  and the German–Soviet Commercial Agreement  in August 1939. The
nonaggression pact made possible Soviet occupation of Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Bessarabia, northern Bukovina, and eastern
Poland. In late November of the same year, unable to coerce the Republic of Finland  by diplomatic means into moving its border 25
kilometres (16 mi) back from Leningrad, Joseph Stalin ordered the invasion of Finland.

In the east, the Soviet military won several decisive victories during border clashes  with the Empire of Japan  in 1938 and 1939.
However, in April 1941, USSR signed the Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact  with the Empire of Japan, recognizing the territorial
integrity of Manchukuo, a Japanese puppet state.

WORLD WAR II
Main article: Eastern Front (World War II)
Soviet soldiers in Berlin, May 1945Although it has been debated  whether the Soviet Union intended to invade Germany once it was strong enough,[27]  Germany itself
broke the treaty and invaded the Soviet Union  on 22 June 1941, starting what was known in the USSR as the "Great Patriotic War".
The Red Army  stopped the seemingly invincible German Army at the Battle of Moscow, aided by an unusually harsh winter. The 
Battle
of Stalingrad, which lasted from late 1942 to early 1943, dealt a severe blow to the Germans from which they never fully recovered
and became a turning point in the war. After Stalingrad, Soviet forces drove through Eastern Europe to Berlin before Germany
surrendered in 1945. The German Army suffered 80% of its military deaths in the Eastern Front.[28]

Left to right: Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt  and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill 
confer in Tehran in 1943.The same year, the USSR, in fulfillment of its agreement with the Allies at the Yalta Conference, denounced the Soviet–Japanese
Neutrality Pact in April 1945[29]  and invaded Manchukuo and other Japan-controlled territories  on 9 August 1945.[30]  This
conflict  ended with a decisive Soviet victory, contributing to the unconditional surrender of Japan  and the end of World War II.

The Soviet Union suffered greatly in the war, losing around 27 million people.[31]  During the war, the Soviet Union together with
the United States, the United Kingdom and China were considered as the Big Four  of Allied powers in World War II [32]  and later
became the Four Policemen  which was the foundation of the United Nations Security Council.[33]  It emerged as a superpower in the
post-war period. Once denied diplomatic recognition  by the Western world, the Soviet Union had official relations with
practically every nation by the late 1940s. A member of the United Nations at its foundation in 1945, the Soviet Union became  one
of the five permanent members  of the United Nations Security Council, which gave it the right to veto any of its resolutions.

The Soviet Union maintained its status as one of the world's two superpowers for four decades through its hegemony in Eastern
Europe, military strength, economic strength, aid to developing countries, and scientific research, especially in space technology
and weaponry.

COLD WAR
Main article: Cold WarDuring the immediate postwar period, the Soviet Union rebuilt and expanded its economy, while maintaining
its strictly centralized control. It aided post-war reconstruction in the countries of Eastern Europe, while turning them into 
satellite states, binding them in a military alliance (the Warsaw Pact) in 1955, and an economic organization (The Council for
Mutual Economic Assistance  or Comecon) from 1949 to 1991, the latter a counterpart to the European Economic Community.[34] 
Later, the Comecon supplied aid to the eventually victorious Communist Party of China, and saw its influence grow elsewhere in the
world. Fearing its ambitions, the Soviet Union's wartime allies, the United Kingdom and the United States, became its enemies. In
the ensuing Cold War, the two sides clashed indirectly using mostly proxies.

KHRUSHCHEV ERA
Main article: History of the Soviet Union (1953–64)
Globe showing the greatest territorial extent of the Soviet Union and states that were dominated politically, economically and/or
militarily by it, which was in 1960. This was during the period of time just after the Cuban Revolution  of 1959 and just before
the official Sino-Soviet split  of 1961.Stalin died on 5 March 1953. Without a mutually agreeable successor, the highest Communist
Party officials initially opted to rule the Soviet Union jointly through a troika. This did not last, however, and Nikita
Khrushchev  eventually won the power struggle by the mid-1950s. He shortly aftwerward denounced Stalin's use of repression  in
1956 and proceeded to ease Stalin's repressive controls over party and society. This was known as de-Stalinization.

Soviet leader Nikita KhrushchevBecause Moscow considered Eastern Europe to be a critically vital buffer zone for the forward
defense of its western borders (in case of another major invasion such as the German invasion of 1940), the USSR sought to cement
its control of the region by transforming the Eastern European countries into satellite states dependent upon and subservient to
its leadership. Soviet military force was used to suppress anti-Stalinist uprisings in Hungary  and Poland  in 1956.

In the late 1950s, a confrontation with China regarding the USSR's rapprochement with the West and what Mao Zedong  perceived as
Khrushchev's revisionism  led to the Sino–Soviet split. This resulted in a break throughout the global Marxist–Leninist movement,
with the governments in Albania, Cambodia  and Somalia  choosing to ally with China in place of the USSR.

During this period of the late 1950s and early 1960s, the Soviet Union continued to realize scientific and technological exploits
in the Space Race, rivaling the United States: launching the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1  in 1957; a living dog named 
Laika  in 1957; the first human being, Yuri Gagarin  in 1961; the first woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova  in 1963; Alexey
Leonov, the first person to walk in space in 1965; the first soft landing on the moon by spacecraft Luna 9 in 1966 and the first
moon rovers, Lunokhod 1  and Lunokhod 2.[35]

Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, first human to travel into spaceKhrushchev initiated "The Thaw", a complex shift in political, cultural and economic life in the Soviet Union. This included some
openness and contact with other nations and new social and economic policies with more emphasis on commodity goods, allowing
living standards to rise dramatically while maintaining high levels of economic growth. Censorship was relaxed as well.

Khrushchev's reforms in agriculture and administration, however, were generally unproductive. In 1962, he precipitated a crisis
with the United States  over the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles  in Cuba. An agreement was made between the Soviet Union
and the United States to remove enemy nuclear missiles from both Cuba and Turkey, concluding the crisis. This event caused
Khrushchev much embarrassment and loss of prestige, resulting in his removal from power in 1964.

BREZHNEV ERA
Main articles: History of the Soviet Union (1964–82)  and Era of StagnationFollowing the ousting of Khrushchev, another period of collective leadership  ensued, consisting of Leonid Brezhnev  as General
Secretary, Alexei Kosygin  as Premier and Nikolai Podgorny  as Chairman of the Presidium, lasting until Brezhnev established
himself in the early 1970s as the preeminent Soviet leader.

In 1968, the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact allies invaded  Czechoslovakia  to halt the Prague Spring  reforms. In the aftermath,
Brezhnev justified the invasion along with the earlier invasions of Eastern European states by introducing the Brezhnev Doctrine,
which claimed the right of the Soviet Union to violate the sovereignty of any country that attempted to replace Marxism–Leninism
with capitalism.

Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev  and US President Jimmy Carter  sign the SALT II arms limitation treaty  in Vienna  on 18
June 1979.Brezhnev presided over a period of détente  with the West that resulted in treaties on armament control (SALT I, SALT II, 
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty) while at the same time building up Soviet military might.

In October 1977, the third Soviet Constitution  was unanimously adopted. The prevailing mood of the Soviet leadership at the time
of Brezhnev's death in 1982 was one of aversion to change. The long period of Brezhnev's rule had come to be dubbed one of
"standstill", with an aging and ossified top political leadership.

GORBACHEV ERA
Main articles: Cold War (1985–91), History of the Soviet Union (1982–91), and 1991 Soviet coup d'état attemptMikhail Gorbachev  in
one-to-one discussions with U.S. President Ronald ReaganTwo developments dominated the decade that followed: the increasingly
apparent crumbling of the Soviet Union's economic and political structures, and the patchwork attempts at reforms to reverse that
process. Kenneth S. Deffeyes argued in Beyond Oil  that the Reagan administration  encouraged Saudi Arabia  to lower the price of
oil  to the point where the Soviets could not make a profit selling their oil, so that the USSR's hard currency  reserves became
depleted.[36]

Brezhnev's next two successors, transitional figures with deep roots in his tradition, did not last long. Yuri Andropov  was 68
years old and Konstantin Chernenko  72 when they assumed power; both died in less than two years. In an attempt to avoid a third
short-lived leader, in 1985, the Soviets turned to the next generation and selected Mikhail Gorbachev.

Gorbachev made significant changes in the economy and party leadership, called perestroika. His policy of glasnost  freed public
access to information after decades of heavy government censorship.

Gorbachev also moved to end the Cold War. In 1988, the Soviet Union abandoned its nine-year war in Afghanistan  and began to
withdraw its forces. In the late 1980s, he refused military support to the Soviet Union's former satellite states[clarify], which
paved the way for Revolutions of 1989. With the tearing down of the Berlin Wall  and with East Germany  and West Germany  pursuing
unification, the Iron Curtain  came down.

In the late 1980s, the constituent republics of the Soviet Union started legal moves towards potentially declaring sovereignty 
over their territories, citing Article 72 of the USSR constitution, which stated that any constituent republic was free to secede.

[37]  On 7 April 1990, a law was passed allowing a republic to secede if more than two-thirds of its residents voted for it in a
referendum.[38]  Many held their first free elections in the Soviet era for their own national legislatures in 1990. Many of these
legislatures proceeded to produce legislation contradicting the Union laws in what was known as the "War of Laws".

In 1989, the Russian SFSR, which was then the largest constituent republic (with about half of the population) convened a newly
elected Congress of People's Deputies. Boris Yeltsin  was elected its chairman. On 12 June 1990, the Congress declared Russia's
sovereignty over its territory  and proceeded to pass laws that attempted to supersede some of the USSR's laws. After a landslide
victory of Sąjūdis  in Lithuania, that country declared its independence restored on 11 March 1990.

A referendum for the preservation of the USSR  was held on 17 March 1991 in nine republics (the remainder having boycotted the
vote), with the majority of the population in those nine republics voting for preservation of the Union. The referendum gave
Gorbachev a minor boost. In the summer of 1991, the New Union Treaty, which would have turned the Soviet Union into a much looser
Union, was agreed upon by eight republics.

Boris Yeltsin  stands on a tank in Moscow to defy the August Coup, 1991The signing of the treaty, however, was interrupted by the August Coup—an attempted coup d'état  by hardline members of the
government and the KGB who sought to reverse Gorbachev's reforms and reassert the central government's control over the republics.
After the coup collapsed, Yeltsin was seen as a hero for his decisive actions, while Gorbachev's power was effectively ended. The
balance of power tipped significantly towards the republics. In August 1991, Latvia and Estonia immediately declared the
restoration of their full independence (following Lithuania's 1990 example). Gorbachev resigned as general secretary in late
August, and soon afterward the Party's activities were indefinitely suspended—effectively ending its rule. By the fall, Gorbachev
could no longer influence events outside of Moscow, and he was being challenged even there by Yeltsin, who had been elected 
President of Russia  in July 1991.

DISSOLUTION
Main articles: Dissolution of the Soviet Union  and Commonwealth of Independent StatesThe remaining 12 republics continued
discussing new, increasingly looser, models of the Union. However, by December, all except Russia and Kazakhstan  had formally
declared independence. During this time, Yeltsin took over what remained of the Soviet government, including the Moscow Kremlin.
The final blow was struck on 1 December, when Ukraine, the second most powerful republic, voted overwhelmingly for independence.
Ukraine's secession ended any realistic chance of the Soviet Union staying together even on a limited scale.

Changes in national boundaries after the end of the Cold WarOn 8 December 1991, the presidents of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus  (formerly Byelorussia), signed the Belavezha Accords, which
declared the Soviet Union dissolved and established the Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS) in its place. While doubts
remained over the authority of the accords to do this, on 21 December 1991, the representatives of all Soviet republics except 
Georgia  signed the Alma-Ata Protocol, which confirmed the accords. On 25 December 1991, Gorbachev resigned as the President of
the USSR, declaring the office extinct. He turned the powers that had been vested in the presidency over to Yeltsin. That night,
the Soviet flag was lowered for the last time, and the Russian tricolor  was raised in its place.

The following day, the Supreme Soviet, the highest governmental body of the Soviet Union, voted both itself and the Soviet Union
out of existence. This is generally recognized as marking the official, final dissolution of the Soviet Union  as a functioning
state. The Soviet Army originally remained under overall CIS command, but was soon absorbed into the different military forces of
the newly independent states. The few remaining Soviet institutions that had not been taken over by Russia ceased to function by
the end of 1991.

Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union on 26 December 1991, Russia was internationally recognized[39]  as its legal
successor  on the international stage. To that end, Russia voluntarily accepted all Soviet foreign debt and claimed overseas
Soviet properties as its own. Under the 1992 Lisbon Protocol, Russia also agreed to receive all nuclear weapons remaining in the
territory of other former Soviet republics. Since then, the Russian Federation has assumed the Soviet Union's rights and
obligations. Ukraine  has refused to recognize exclusive Russian claims to succession of the USSR and claimed such status for
Ukraine as well, which was codified in Articles 7 and 8 of its 1991 law On Legal Succession of Ukraine. Since its independence in
1991 Ukraine has continued to pursue claims against Russia in foreign courts, seeking to recover its share of the foreign property
that was owned by the Soviet Union.

Internally displaced Azerbaijanis  from Nagorno-Karabakh, 1993The dissolution of the Soviet Union  was followed by a severe economic contraction and catastrophic fall in living standards  in 
post-Soviet states[40]  including a rapid increase in poverty,[41][42][43]  crime,[44][45]  corruption,[46][47]  unemployment,[48] 
 homelessness,[49][50]  rates of disease,[51][52][53]  and income inequality,[54]  along with decreases in calorie intake, life
expectancy, adult literacy, and income.[55]  The economic shocks that accompanied wholesale privatization  were associated with
sharp increases in mortality. Data shows Russia, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia saw a tripling of unemployment and a
42% increase in male death rates between 1991 and 1994.[56][57]

In summing up the international ramifications of these events, Vladislav Zubok  stated: "The collapse of the Soviet empire was an
event of epochal geopolitical, military, ideological, and economic significance. "[58]

POST-SOVIET STATES
Main article: Post-Soviet statesThe analysis of the succession of states  with respect to the 15 post-Soviet states  is complex. The Russian Federation  is seen
as the legal continuator  state and is for most purposes the heir to the Soviet Union. It retained ownership of all former Soviet
embassy properties, as well as the old Soviet UN membership and permanent membership on the Security Council.[59]  The Baltic
states  are not successor states to the Soviet Union;[60]  they are instead considered to have de jure  continuity with their pre-

World War II  governments through the non-recognition of the original Soviet incorporation in 1940.[59]  The other 11 post-Soviet
states are considered newly-independent successor states  to the Soviet Union.[59]

There are additionally four states that claim independence from the other internationally recognized post-Soviet states, but 
possess limited international recognition: Abkhazia, Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia, and Transnistria. The Chechen  separatist
movement of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria  lacks any international recognition.

POLITICS
Main articles: Politics of the Soviet Union  and Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet UnionPart of a series  on
Marxism–LeninismConcepts * Anti-imperialism
 * Anti-revisionism
 * Commanding heights of the economy
 * Communist society
 * Communist state
 * Democratic centralism
 * Economic planning
 * Marxist–Leninist atheism
 * One-party state
 * People's democracy
 * Popular front
 * Proletarian internationalism
 * Socialist patriotism
 * Socialist state
 * Theory of the productive forces
 * Third Period
 * Vanguardism

Variants * Guevarism
 * Ho Chi Minh Thought
 * Hoxhaism
 * Khrushchevism
 * Maoism
 * Stalinism

People * Joseph Stalin
 * Ernst Thälmann
 * Earl Browder
 * Gonchigiin Bumtsend
 * Mao Zedong
 * José Díaz
 * Josip Broz Tito
 * Enver Hoxha
 * Palmiro Togliatti
 * Nikita Khrushchev
 * Fidel Castro
 * Che Guevara
 * Ho Chi Minh
 * Deng Xiaoping
 * Mathieu Kérékou
 * Agostinho Neto
 * Samora Machel
 * Thomas Sankara
 * Alfonso Cano

Literature * Wage Labour and Capital
 * Materialism and Empirio-criticism
 * Imperialism(Lenin)
 * What Is to Be Done?
 * The State and Revolution
 * Dialectical and
   Historical Materialism
 * Guerrilla Warfare
 * Fundamentals of
   Marxism–Leninism

History * October Revolution
 * Soviet Union
 * Comintern
 * Hungarian Soviet Republic
 * Spanish Civil War
 * World War II
 * Warsaw Pact
 * Greek Civil War
 * Chinese Revolution
 * Korean War
 * Cuban Revolution
 * De-Stalinization
 * Non-Aligned Movement
 * Sino-Soviet split
 * Vietnam War
 * Portuguese Colonial War
 * Black Power movement
 * Nicaraguan Revolution
 * Nepalese Civil War
 * Naxalite insurgency

Related topics * Bolshevism
 * Marxism
 * Titoism
 * Trotskyism

 * Communism portal
 * Socialism portal
 * Politics portal

 * v
 * t
 * e

There were three power hierarchies in the Soviet Union: the legislature  represented by the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union,
the government represented by the Council of Ministers, and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union  (CPSU), the only legal party
and the ultimate policymaker in the country.[61]

COMMUNIST PARTY
Main article: Communist Party of the Soviet UnionAt the top of the Communist Party was the Central Committee, elected at Party Congresses  and Conferences. The Central Committee
in turn voted for a Politburo  (called the Presidium between 1952–1966), Secretariat  and the General Secretary  (First Secretary
from 1953 to 1966), the de facto highest office in the USSR.[62]  Depending on the degree of power consolidation, it was either
the Politburo as a collective body or the General Secretary, who always was one of the Politburo members, that effectively led the
party and the country[63]  (except for the period of the highly personalized authority of Stalin, exercised directly through his
position in the Council of Ministers rather than the Politburo after 1941).[64]  They were not controlled by the general party
membership, as the key principle of the party organization was democratic centralism, demanding strict subordination to higher
bodies, and elections went uncontested, endorsing the candidates proposed from above.[65]

The Communist Party maintained its dominance over the state largely through its control over the system of appointments. All
senior government officials and most deputies of the Supreme Soviet were members of the CPSU. Of the party heads themselves,
Stalin in 1941–1953 and Khrushchev in 1958–1964 were Premiers. Upon the forced retirement of Khrushchev, the party leader was
prohibited from this kind of double membership,[66]  but the later General Secretaries for at least some part of their tenure
occupied the largely ceremonial position of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, the nominal head of state. The
institutions at lower levels were overseen and at times supplanted by primary party organizations.[67]

In practice, however, the degree of control the party was able to exercise over the state bureaucracy, particularly after the
death of Stalin, was far from total, with the bureaucracy pursuing different interests that were at times in conflict with the
party.[68]  Nor was the party itself monolithic from top to bottom, although factions were officially banned.[69]

GOVERNMENT
Main article: Government of the Soviet Union
The Grand Kremlin Palace, seat of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, 1982The Supreme Soviet  (successor of the Congress of Soviets  and Central Executive Committee) was nominally the highest state body
for most of the Soviet history,[70]  at first acting as a rubber stamp institution, approving and implementing all decisions made
by the party. However, the powers and functions of the Supreme Soviet were extended in the late 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, including
the creation of new state commissions and committees. It gained additional powers relating to the approval of the Five-Year Plans 
and the Soviet government budget.[71]  The Supreme Soviet elected a Presidium  to wield its power between plenary sessions,[72] 
ordinarily held twice a year, and appointed the Supreme Court,[73]  the Procurator General[74]  and the Council of Ministers
(known before 1946 as the Council of People's Commissars), headed by the Chairman  (Premier) and managing an enormous bureaucracy
responsible for the administration of the economy and society.[72]  State and party structures of the constituent republics 
largely emulated the structure of the central institutions, although the Russian SFSR, unlike the other constituent republics, for
most of its history had no republican branch of the CPSU, being ruled directly by the union-wide party until 1990. Local
authorities were organized likewise into party committees, local Soviets  and executive committees. While the state system was
nominally federal, the party was unitary.[75]

The state security police (the KGB  and its predecessor agencies) played an important role in Soviet politics. It was instrumental
in the Stalinist terror,[76]  but after the death of Stalin, the state security police was brought under strict party control.
Under Yuri Andropov, KGB chairman in 1967–1982 and General Secretary from 1982 to 1983, the KGB engaged in the suppression of
political dissent and maintained an extensive network of informers, reasserting itself as a political actor to some extent
independent of the party-state structure,[77]  culminating in the anti-corruption campaign targeting high party officials in the
late 1970s and early 1980s.[78]

SEPARATION OF POWER AND REFORM
Main article: Perestroika
Nationalist anti-government riots in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, 1990The Union constitutions, which were promulgated in 1918, 1924, 1936  and 1977,[79]  did not limit state power. No formal 
separation of powers  existed between the Party, Supreme Soviet and Council of Ministers[80]  that represented executive and 
legislative  branches of the government. The system was governed less by statute than by informal conventions, and no settled
mechanism of leadership succession existed. Bitter and at times deadly power struggles took place in the Politburo after the
deaths of Lenin[81]  and Joseph Stalin,[82]  as well as after Khrushchev's dismissal,[83]  itself due to a decision by both the
Politburo and the Central Committee.[84]  All leaders of the Communist Party before Gorbachev died in office, except Georgy
Malenkov[85]  and Khrushchev, both dismissed from the party leadership amid internal struggle within the party.[84]

Between 1988 and 1990, facing considerable opposition, Mikhail Gorbachev  enacted reforms shifting power away from the highest
bodies of the party and making the Supreme Soviet less dependent on them. The Congress of People's Deputies  was established, the
majority of whose members were directly elected in competitive elections held in March 1989. The Congress now elected the Supreme
Soviet, which became a full-time parliament, much stronger than before. For the first time since the 1920s, it refused to rubber
stamp proposals from the party and Council of Ministers.[86]  In 1990, Gorbachev introduced and assumed the position of the 
President of the Soviet Union, concentrated power in his executive office, independent of the party, and subordinated the
government,[87]  now renamed the Cabinet of Ministers of the USSR, to himself.[88]

Tensions grew between the union-wide authorities under Gorbachev, reformists led in Russia by Boris Yeltsin  and controlling the
newly elected Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR, and Communist Party hardliners. On 19–21 August 1991, a group of hardliners
staged an abortive coup attempt. Following the failed coup, the State Council of the Soviet Union  became the highest organ of
state power "in the period of transition".[89]  Gorbachev resigned as General Secretary, only remaining President for the final
months of the existence of the USSR.[90]

JUDICIAL SYSTEM
Main article: Law of the Soviet UnionSee also: Socialist lawThe judiciary was not independent of the other branches of government.
The Supreme Court  supervised the lower courts (People's Court) and applied the law as established by the Constitution or as
interpreted by the Supreme Soviet. The Constitutional Oversight Committee reviewed the constitutionality of laws and acts. The
Soviet Union used the inquisitorial system  of Roman law, where the judge, procurator, and defense attorney collaborate to
establish the truth.[91]

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
Main articles: Soviet republic (system of government)  and Republics of the Soviet UnionConstitutionally, the USSR was a
federation of constituent Union Republics, which were either unitary states, such as Ukraine  or Byelorussia  (SSRs), or federal
states, such as Russia  or Transcaucasia  (SFSRs),[61]  all four being the founding republics who signed the Treaty on the
Creation of the USSR  in December 1922. In 1924, during the national delimitation  in Central Asia, Uzbekistan  and Turkmenistan 
were formed from parts of the Russia's Turkestan ASSR  and two Soviet dependencies, the Khorezm  and Bukharan SSRs. In 1929, 
Tajikistan  was split off from the Uzbekistan. With the constitution of 1936, the Transcaucasian SFSR was dissolved, resulting in
its constituent republics of Armenia, Georgia  and Azerbaijan  being elevated to Union Republics, while Kazakhstan  and Kirghizia 
were split off from Russian SFSR, resulting in the same status.[92]  In August 1940, Moldavia  was formed from parts of the
Ukraine and Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina. Estonia, Latvia  and Lithuania  (SSRs) were also admitted into the union  which was 
not recognized by most of the international community  and was considered an illegal occupation. Karelia  was split off from
Russia as a Union Republic in March 1940 and was reabsorbed in 1956. Between July 1956 and September 1991, there were 15 union
republics (see map below).[93]

While nominally a union of equals, in practice the Soviet Union was dominated by the Russian SFSR—to such an extent that for most
of the Soviet Union's existence, it was commonly (but incorrectly) referred to as "Russia." While the RSFSR was technically only
one republic within the larger union, it was by far the largest (both in terms of population and geography), most powerful, and
most highly developed. Historian Matthew White  wrote that it was an open secret that the Soviet Union's federal structure was
"window dressing" for Russian dominance. For that reason, the people of the Soviet Union were usually called "Russians," not
"Soviets," since "everyone knew who really ran the show."[94]

#RepublicMap of the Union Republics between 1956–19911Russian SFSR2Ukrainian SSR3Byelorussian SSR4Uzbek SSR5Kazakh SSR6Georgian
SSR7Azerbaijan SSR8Lithuanian SSR9Moldavian SSR10Latvian SSR11Kirghiz SSR12Tajik SSR13Armenian SSR14Turkmen SSR15Estonian SSR
ECONOMY
Main article: Economy of the Soviet Union
The DneproGES, one of many hydroelectric  power stations in the Soviet Union
The Soviet Union in comparison to other countries by GDP (nominal) per capita in 1965 based on a West-German school book (1971). >
5,000 DM 2,500 – 5,000 DM 1,000 – 2,500 DM 500 – 1,000 DM 250 – 500 DM < 250 DMThe Soviet Union became the first country to adopt
a planned economy, whereby production and distribution of goods were centralized and directed by the government. The first
Bolshevik experience with a command economy was the policy of War communism, which involved the nationalization of industry,
centralized distribution of output, coercive requisition of agricultural production, and attempts to eliminate the circulation of
money, as well as private enterprises and free trade. After the severe economic collapse caused by the war, Lenin replaced War
Communism with the New Economic Policy  (NEP) in 1921, legalising free trade and private ownership of smaller businesses. The
economy quickly recovered.[95]

Following a lengthy debate among the members of Politburo over the course of economic development, by 1928–1929, upon gaining
control of the country, Joseph Stalin  abandoned the NEP and pushed for full central planning, starting forced collectivization
of
agriculture  and enacting draconian labor legislation. Resources were mobilized for rapid industrialization, which greatly
expanded Soviet capacity in heavy industry and capital goods during the 1930s.[95]  Preparation for war was one of the main
driving forces behind industrialization, mostly due to distrust of the outside capitalistic world.[96]  As a result, the USSR was
transformed from a largely agrarian economy into a great industrial power, leading the way for its emergence as a superpower after
 World War II.[97]  During the war, the Soviet economy and infrastructure suffered massive devastation and required extensive
reconstruction.[98]

Picking cotton in Armenia  in the 1930sBy the early 1940s, the Soviet economy had become relatively self-sufficient; for most of the period until the creation of Comecon
, only a very small share of domestic products was traded internationally.[99]  After the creation of the Eastern Bloc, external
trade rose rapidly. Still the influence of the world economy  on the USSR was limited by fixed domestic prices and a state
monopoly on foreign trade.[100]  Grain and sophisticated consumer manufactures became major import articles from around the 1960s.

[99]  During the arms race  of the Cold War, the Soviet economy was burdened by military expenditures, heavily lobbied for by a
powerful bureaucracy dependent on the arms industry. At the same time, the Soviet Union became the largest arms exporter to the 
Third World. Significant amounts of Soviet resources during the Cold War were allocated in aid  to the other socialist states.[99]

From the 1930s until its dissolution in late 1991, the way the Soviet economy operated remained essentially unchanged. The economy
was formally directed by central planning, carried out by Gosplan  and organized in five-year plans. In practice, however, the
plans were highly aggregated and provisional, subject to ad hoc  intervention by superiors. All key economic decisions were taken
by the political leadership. Allocated resources and plan targets were normally denominated in rubles  rather than in physical
goods. Credit  was discouraged, but widespread. Final allocation of output was achieved through relatively decentralized,
unplanned contracting. Although in theory prices were legally set from above, in practice the actual prices were often negotiated,
and informal horizontal links (between producer factories etc.) were widespread.[95]

A number of basic services  were state-funded, such as education  and healthcare. In the manufacturing sector, heavy industry and
defense were assigned higher priority than the production of consumer goods.[101]  Consumer goods, particularly outside large
cities, were often scarce, of poor quality and limited choice. Under command economy, consumers had almost no influence over
production, so the changing demands of a population with growing incomes could not be satisfied by supplies at rigidly fixed
prices.[102]  A massive unplanned second economy grew up alongside the planned one at low levels, providing some of the goods and
services that the planners could not. Legalization of some elements of the decentralized economy was attempted with the reform of
1965.[95]

Workers of the Salihorsk  potash plant, Belarus, 1968Although statistics of the Soviet economy are notoriously unreliable and its
economic growth difficult to estimate precisely,[103][104]  by most accounts, the economy continued to expand until the mid-1980s.
During the 1950s and 1960s, the Soviet economy experienced comparatively high growth and was catching up to the West.[105] 
However, after 1970, the growth, while still positive, steadily declined  much more quickly and consistently than in other
countries despite a rapid increase in the capital stock  (the rate of increase in capital was only surpassed by Japan).[95]

Overall, between 1960 and 1989, the growth rate of per capita income in the Soviet Union was slightly above the world average
(based on 102 countries).[citation needed]  According to Stanley Fischer  and William Easterly, growth could have been faster. By
their calculation, per capita income of Soviet Union in 1989 should have been twice as high as it was considering the amount of
investment, education and population. The authors attribute this poor performance to low productivity of capital in the Soviet
Union.[106]  Steven Rosenfielde states that the standard of living actually declined as a result of Stalin's despotism, and while
there was a brief improvement following his death, lapsed into stagnation.[107]

In 1987, Mikhail Gorbachev  tried to reform and revitalize the economy with his program of perestroika. His policies relaxed state
control over enterprises, but did not yet allow it to be replaced by market incentives, ultimately resulting in a sharp decline in
production output. The economy, already suffering from reduced petroleum export revenues, started to collapse. Prices were still
fixed, and property was still largely state-owned until after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.[95][102]  For most of the
period after World War II up to its collapse, the Soviet economy was the second largest in the world  by GDP (PPP), and was 3rd in
the world during the middle of the 1980s to 1989,[108]  though in per capita  terms the Soviet GDP was behind that of the First
World  countries.[109]  When compared to countries who had a similar GDP per capita to the Soviet Union in 1928, the Soviets
experienced significant growth.[110]

In 1990, the Soviet Union had a Human Development Index  of 0.920, placing them in the "high" category of human development. They
had the third highest in the Eastern Bloc, behind Czechoslovakia  and East Germany, and twenty-fifth highest in the world out of
130 countries in total.[111]

ENERGY
Main article: Energy policy of the Soviet Union
Soviet stamp depicting the 30th anniversary of the International Atomic Energy Agency, published in 1987, a year following the 
Chernobyl nuclear disasterThe need for fuel declined in the Soviet Union from the 1970s to the 1980s,[112]  both per ruble of gross social product and per
ruble of industrial product. At the start, this decline grew very rapidly but gradually slowed down between 1970 and 1975. From
1975 and 1980, it grew even slower,[clarification needed]  only 2.6 percent.[113]  David Wilson, a historian, believed that the
gas industry would account for 40 percent of Soviet fuel production by the end of the century. His theory did not come to fruition
because of the USSR's collapse.[114]  The USSR, in theory, would have continued to have an economic growth rate of 2–2.5 percent
during the 1990s because of Soviet energy fields.[clarification needed][115]  However, the energy sector faced many difficulties,
among them the country's high military expenditure and hostile relations with the First World  (pre-Gorbachev era).[116]

In 1991, the Soviet Union had a pipeline  network of 82,000 kilometres (51,000 mi) for crude oil  and another 206,500 kilometres
(128,300 mi) for natural gas.[117]  Petroleum and petroleum-based products, natural gas, metals, wood, agricultural products, and
a variety of manufactured goods, primarily machinery, arms and military equipment, were exported.[118]  In the 1970s and 1980s,
the Soviet Union heavily relied on fossil fuel exports to earn hard currency.[99]  At its peak in 1988, it was the largest
producer and second largest exporter of crude oil, surpassed only by Saudi Arabia.[119]

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Main article: Science and technology in the Soviet Union
Soviet stamp showing the orbit of Sputnik 1The Soviet Union placed great emphasis on science and technology  within its economy,[120]  however, the most remarkable Soviet
successes in technology, such as producing the world's first space satellite, typically were the responsibility of the military.
[101]  Lenin believed that the USSR would never overtake the developed world if it remained as technologically backward as it was
upon its founding. Soviet authorities proved their commitment to Lenin's belief by developing massive networks, research and
development organizations. In the early 1960s, the Soviets awarded 40% of chemistry PhDs to women, compared to only 5% who
received such a degree in the United States.[121]  By 1989, Soviet scientists were among the world's best-trained specialists in
several areas, such as energy physics, selected areas of medicine, mathematics, welding and military technologies. Due to rigid
state planning and bureaucracy, the Soviets remained far behind technologically in chemistry, biology, and computers when compared
to the First World.

Project Socrates, under the Reagan administration, determined that the Soviet Union addressed the acquisition of science and
technology in a manner that was radically different from what the US was using. In the case of the US, economic prioritization was
being used for indigenous research and development  as the means to acquire science and technology in both the private and public
sectors. In contrast, the Soviet Union was offensively and defensively maneuvering in the acquisition and utilization of the
worldwide technology, to increase the competitive advantage that they acquired from the technology, while preventing the US from
acquiring a competitive advantage. However, in addition, the Soviet Union's technology-based planning was executed in a
centralized, government-centric manner that greatly hindered its flexibility. It was this significant lack of flexibility that was
exploited by the US to undermine the strength of the Soviet Union and thus foster its reform.[122][123][124]

TRANSPORT
Main article: Transport in the Soviet UnionAeroflot's flag during the Soviet eraTransport was a key component of the nation's
economy. The economic centralization  of the late 1920s and 1930s led to the development of infrastructure on a massive scale,
most notably the establishment of Aeroflot, an aviation enterprise.[125]  The country had a wide variety of modes of transport by
land, water and air.[117]  However, due to bad maintenance, much of the road, water and Soviet civil aviation transport were
outdated and technologically backward compared to the First World.[126]

Soviet rail transport was the largest and most intensively used in the world;[126]  it was also better developed than most of its
Western counterparts.[127]  By the late 1970s and early 1980s, Soviet economists were calling for the construction of more roads
to alleviate some of the burden from the railways and to improve the Soviet government budget.[128]  The street network  and 
automotive industry[129]  remained underdeveloped,[130]  and dirt roads  were common outside major cities.[131]  Soviet
maintenance projects proved unable to take care of even the few roads the country had. By the early-to-mid-1980s, the Soviet
authorities tried to solve the road problem by ordering the construction of new ones.[131]  Meanwhile, the automobile industry was
growing at a faster rate than road construction.[132]  The underdeveloped road network led to a growing demand for public
transport.[133]

Despite improvements, several aspects of the transport sector were still[when?]  riddled with problems due to outdated
infrastructure, lack of investment, corruption and bad decision-making. Soviet authorities were unable to meet the growing demand
for transport infrastructure and services.

The Soviet merchant navy  was one of the largest in the world.[117]

DEMOGRAPHICS
Main article: Demographics of the Soviet Union
Population of the USSR (red) and the post-Soviet states  (blue) from 1961 to 2009. And projection (dotted blue) 2010 to 2100.
Excess deaths over the course of World War I  and the Russian Civil War  (including the postwar famine) amounted to a combined
total of 18 million,[134]  some 10 million in the 1930s,[25]  and more than 26 million in 1941–5. The postwar Soviet population 
was 45 to 50 million smaller than it would have been if pre-war demographic growth had continued.[31]  According to Catherine
Merridale, "... reasonable estimate would place the total number of excess deaths for the whole period somewhere around 60
million."[135]

The birth rate  of the USSR decreased from 44.0 per thousand in 1926 to 18.0 in 1974, largely due to increasing urbanization and
the rising average age of marriages. The mortality rate  demonstrated a gradual decrease as well – from 23.7 per thousand in 1926
to 8.7 in 1974. In general, the birth rates of the southern republics in Transcaucasia and Central Asia were considerably higher
than those in the northern parts of the Soviet Union, and in some cases even increased in the post–World War II period, a
phenomenon partly attributed to slower rates of urbanization and traditionally earlier marriages in the southern republics.[136] 
Soviet Europe moved towards sub-replacement fertility, while Soviet Central Asia  continued to exhibit population growth well
above replacement-level fertility.[137]

The late 1960s and the 1970s witnessed a reversal of the declining trajectory of the rate of mortality in the USSR, and was
especially notable among men of working age, but was also prevalent in Russia and other predominantly Slavic areas of the country.

[138]  An analysis of the official data from the late 1980s showed that after worsening in the late-1970s and the early 1980s,
adult mortality began to improve again.[139]  The infant mortality rate increased from 24.7 in 1970 to 27.9 in 1974. Some
researchers regarded the rise as largely real, a consequence of worsening health conditions and services.[140]  The rises in both
adult and infant mortality were not explained or defended by Soviet officials, and the Soviet government  simply stopped
publishing all mortality statistics for ten years. Soviet demographers and health specialists remained silent about the mortality
increases until the late-1980s, when the publication of mortality data resumed and researchers could delve into the real causes.
[141]

EDUCATION
Main article: Education in the Soviet Union
Soviet pupils in Milovice, Czechoslovakia  (now Czech Republic), 1985Before 1917, education was not free in the Russian Empire  and was therefore either inaccessible or barely accessible for many
children from lower-class working and peasant families. Estimates from 1917 recorded that 75–85 percent of the Russian population
was illiterate.

Anatoly Lunacharsky  became the first People's Commissar  for Education of Soviet Russia. At the beginning, the Soviet authorities
placed great emphasis on the elimination of illiteracy. People who were literate  were automatically hired as teachers. For a
short period, quality was sacrificed for quantity. By 1940, Joseph Stalin could announce that illiteracy had been eliminated.
Throughout the 1930s social mobility  rose sharply, which has been attributed to Soviet reforms in education.[142]  In the
aftermath of the Great Patriotic War, the country's educational system expanded dramatically. This expansion had a tremendous
effect. In the 1960s, nearly all Soviet children had access to education, the only exception being those living in remote areas. 
Nikita Khrushchev  tried to make education more accessible, making it clear to children that education was closely linked to the
needs of society. Education also became important in giving rise to the New Man.[143]  Citizens directly entering the work force
had the constitutional right to a job and to free vocational training.

The country's system of education  was highly centralized and universally accessible to all citizens, with affirmative action  for
applicants from nations associated with cultural backwardness. However, as part of the general antisemitic policy, an unofficial 
Jewish quota  was applied in the leading institutions of higher education by subjecting Jewish applicants to harsher entrance
examinations.[144][145][146][147]  The Brezhnev era also introduced a rule that required all university applicants to present a
reference from the local Komsomol  party secretary.[148]  According to statistics from 1986, the number of higher education
students per the population of 10,000 was 181 for the USSR, compared to 517 for the U.S.[149]

ETHNIC GROUPS
The Soviet Union was a very ethnically diverse country, with more than 100 distinct ethnic groups. The total population was
estimated at 293 million in 1991. According to a 1990 estimate, the majority were Russians  (50.78%), followed by Ukrainians 
(15.45%) and Uzbeks  (5.84%).[150]

All citizens of the USSR had their own ethnic affiliation. The ethnicity of a person was chosen at the age of sixteen[151]  by the
child's parents. If the parents did not agree, the child was automatically assigned the ethnicity of the father. Partly due to
Soviet policies, some of the smaller minority ethnic groups were considered part of larger ones, such as the Mingrelians  of 
Georgia, who were classified with the linguistically related Georgians.[152]  Some ethnic groups voluntarily assimilated, while
others were brought in by force. Russians, Belarusians, and Ukrainians shared close cultural ties, while other groups did not.
With multiple nationalities living in the same territory, ethnic antagonisms  developed over the years.[153][neutrality  is 
disputed]

 * Ethnographic map of the Soviet Union, 1941
   
   
 * Number and share of Ukrainians  in the population of the regions of the RSFSR (1926 census)
   
   
 * Number and share of Ukrainians in the population of the regions of the RSFSR  (1979 census)
   
   
 * Map showing the distribution of Muslims  within the Soviet Union in 1979
   
   

HEALTH
Main article: Health care in the Soviet Union
An early Soviet-era poster discouraging unsafe abortion  practicesIn 1917, before the revolution, health conditions were
significantly behind those of developed countries. As Lenin later noted, "Either the lice will defeat socialism, or socialism will
defeat the lice".[154]  The Soviet principle of health care was conceived by the People's Commissariat for Health  in 1918. Health
care was to be controlled by the state and would be provided to its citizens free of charge, this at the time being a
revolutionary concept. Article 42 of the 1977 Soviet Constitution  gave all citizens the right to health protection and free
access to any health institutions in the USSR. Before Leonid Brezhnev  became General Secretary, the healthcare system of the
Soviet Union was held in high esteem by many foreign specialists. This changed however, from Brezhnev's accession and Mikhail
Gorbachev's tenure as leader, the Soviet health care system was heavily criticized for many basic faults, such as the quality of
service and the unevenness in its provision.[155]  Minister of Health  Yevgeniy Chazov, during the 19th Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, while highlighting such Soviet successes as having the most doctors and hospitals in the world,
recognized the system's areas for improvement and felt that billions of Soviet rubles  were squandered.[156]

After the socialist revolution, the life expectancy for all age groups went up. This statistic in itself was seen by some that the
 socialist system  was superior to the capitalist system. These improvements continued into the 1960s, when the life expectancy in
the Soviet Union surpassed that of the United States. It remained stable during most years, although in the 1970s, it went down
slightly, possibly because of alcohol abuse. At the same time, infant mortality began to rise. After 1974, the government stopped
publishing statistics on this. This trend can be partly explained by the number of pregnancies rising drastically in the Asian
part of the country where infant mortality was highest, while declining markedly in the more developed European part of the Soviet
Union.[157]  The USSR had several centers of excellence, such as the Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Complex, founded in 1988 by Russian
eye surgeon Svyatoslav Fyodorov.

LANGUAGE
Main article: Languages of the Soviet UnionThe Soviet government headed by Vladimir Lenin gave small language groups their own
writing systems.[158]  The development of these writing systems was very successful, even though some flaws were detected. During
the later days of the USSR, countries with the same multilingual  situation implemented similar policies. A serious problem when
creating these writing systems was that the languages differed dialectally  greatly from each other.[159]  When a language had
been given a writing system and appeared in a notable publication, that language would attain "official language" status. There
were many minority languages which never received their own writing system; therefore their speakers were forced to have a second
language.[160]  There are examples where the Soviet government retreated from this policy, most notable under Stalin's regime,
where education was discontinued in languages which were not widespread enough. These languages were then assimilated into another
language, mostly Russian.[161]  During the Great Patriotic War, some minority languages were banned, and their speakers accused of
collaborating with the enemy.[162]

As the most widely spoken of the Soviet Union's many languages, Russian de facto  functioned as an official language, as the
"language of interethnic communication" (Russian: язык межнационального общения), but only assumed the de jure  status as the
official national language in 1990.[163]

RELIGION
Main article: Religion in the Soviet Union
The Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, Moscow, during its demolition in 1931The religious made up a significant minority of the
Soviet Union prior to break up. In 1990, the religious makeup was 20% Russian Orthodox, 10% Muslim, 7% Protestant, Armenian
Apostolic, Georgian Orthodox, and Roman Catholic, less than 1% Jewish and 60% atheist.[164]

Christianity  and Islam  had the greatest number of adherents among the Soviet state's religious citizens.[165]  Eastern
Christianity  predominated among Christians, with Russia's traditional Russian Orthodox Church  being the Soviet Union's largest 
Christian denomination. About 90 percent of the Soviet Union's Muslims were Sunnis, with Shias  concentrated in Azerbaijan.[165] 
Smaller groups included Roman Catholics, Jews, Buddhists, and a variety of Protestant  sects.[165]

Religious influence had been strong in the Russian Empire. The Russian Orthodox Church enjoyed a privileged status as the church
of the monarchy and took part in carrying out official state functions.[166]  The immediate period following the establishment of
the Soviet state included a struggle against the Orthodox Church, which the revolutionaries considered an ally of the former 
ruling classes.[167]

In Soviet law, the "freedom to hold religious services" was constitutionally guaranteed, although the ruling Communist Party
regarded religion as incompatible with the Marxist  spirit of scientific materialism.[167]  In practice, the Soviet system
subscribed to a narrow interpretation of this right, and in fact utilized a range of official measures to discourage religion and
curb the activities of religious groups.[167]

The 1918 Council of People's Commissars  decree establishing the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) as a secular
state also decreed that "the teaching of religion in all [places] where subjects of general instruction are taught, is forbidden.
Citizens may teach and may be taught religion privately."[168]  Among further restrictions, those adopted in 1929, a half-decade
into Stalin's rule, included express prohibitions on a range of church activities, including meetings for organized Bible study.
[167]  Both Christian and non-Christian establishments were shut down by the thousands in the 1920s and 1930s. By 1940, as many as
90 percent of the churches, synagogues, and mosques that had been operating in 1917 were closed.[169]

Convinced that religious anti-Sovietism  had become a thing of the past with most Soviet Christians, and with the looming threat
of war, the Stalin regime began shifting to a more moderate religion policy in the late 1930s.[170]  Soviet religious
establishments overwhelmingly rallied to support the war effort during the Soviet war with Nazi Germany. Amid other accommodations
to religious faith after Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, churches were reopened, Radio Moscow  began broadcasting a religious
hour, and a historic meeting between Stalin and Orthodox Church leader Patriarch Sergius of Moscow  was held in 1943. Stalin had
the support of the majority of the religious people in the Soviet Union even through the late 1980s.[170]  The general tendency of
this period was an increase in religious activity among believers of all faiths.[171]

The Soviet establishment under General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev's leadership clashed with the churches in 1958–1964, a period
when atheism  was emphasized in the educational curriculum, and numerous state publications promoted atheistic views.[170]  During
this period, the number of churches fell from 20,000 to 10,000 from 1959 to 1965, and the number of synagogues dropped from 500 to
97.[172]  The number of working mosques also declined, falling from 1,500 to 500 within a decade.[172]

Religious institutions remained monitored by the Soviet government, but churches, synagogues, temples, and mosques were all given
more leeway in the Brezhnev era.[173]  Official relations between the Orthodox Church and the Soviet government again warmed to
the point that the Brezhnev government twice honored Orthodox Patriarch Alexy I  with the Order of the Red Banner of Labour.[174] 
A poll conducted by Soviet authorities in 1982 recorded 20 percent of the Soviet population as "active religious believers."[175]

WOMEN
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (March 2015)Main article: Women_in_Russia § Soviet_eraSoviet efforts
to expand social, political and economic opportunities for women constitute "the earliest and perhaps most far-reaching attempt
ever undertaken to transform the status and role of women."[176]

CULTURE
Main article: Culture of the Soviet UnionSee also: Soviet cuisine  and Fashion in the Soviet Union
The Enthusiast's March, a 1930s song famous in the Soviet UnionThe culture of the Soviet Union passed through several stages
during the USSR's 69-year existence. During the first eleven years following the Revolution (1918–1929), there was relative
freedom and artists experimented with several different styles to find a distinctive Soviet style of art. Lenin wanted art to be
accessible to the Russian people. On the other hand, hundreds of intellectuals, writers, and artists were exiled or executed, and
their work banned, for example Nikolay Gumilyov  (shot for alleged conspiring against the Bolshevik regime) and Yevgeny Zamyatin 
(banned).[177]

The government encouraged a variety of trends. In art and literature, numerous schools, some traditional and others radically
experimental, proliferated. Communist writers Maxim Gorky  and Vladimir Mayakovsky  were active during this time. Film, as a means
of influencing a largely illiterate society, received encouragement from the state; much of director Sergei Eisenstein's best work
dates from this period.

Later, during Stalin's rule, Soviet culture was characterized by the rise and domination of the government-imposed style of 
socialist realism, with all other trends being severely repressed, with rare exceptions, for example Mikhail Bulgakov's works.
Many writers were imprisoned and killed.[178]

Following the Khrushchev Thaw  of the late 1950s and early 1960s, censorship was diminished. During this time, a distinctive
period of Soviet culture developed characterized by conformist public life and intense focus on personal life. Greater
experimentation in art forms were again permissible, with the result that more sophisticated and subtly critical work began to be
produced. The regime loosened its emphasis on socialist realism; thus, for instance, many protagonists of the novels of author 
Yury Trifonov  concerned themselves with problems of daily life rather than with building socialism. An underground dissident
literature, known as samizdat, developed during this late period. In architecture the Khrushchev era mostly focused on functional
design as opposed to the highly decorated style of Stalin's epoch.

In the second half of the 1980s, Gorbachev's policies of perestroika  and glasnost  significantly expanded freedom of expression 
throughout the Soviet Union in the media & press.[179]

SEE ALSO
 * Soviet Union portal
 * Communism portal
 * Russia portal

 * Soviet Empire
 * Neo-Sovietism
 * Eurasian Economic Union
 * Commonwealth of Independent States
 * Collective Security Treaty Organization
 * Index of Soviet Union-related articles

NOTES
 1. ^  Ukrainian: рада  (rada); Polish: rada; Belarusian: савет; Uzbek: совет; Kazakh: совет/кеңес; Azerbaijani: совет; Lithuanian
    : taryba; Moldovan: совиет; Latvian: padome; Kyrgyz: совет; Armenian: խորհուրդ / սովետ; Estonian: nõukogu

REFERENCES
 1.   ^  Declaration № 142-Н  of the Soviet of the Republics of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, formally establishing the
      dissolution of the Soviet Union as a state and subject of international law. (Russian)
 2.   ^  Scott Shane (2 October 1990). "73 Years of State Atheism in the Soviet Union, ended amid collapse in 1990". Baltimore Sun
      . Retrieved 13 October  2013.
 3.   ^  Historical Dictionary of Socialism. James C. Docherty, Peter Lamb. Page 85. "The Soviet Union was a one-party
      Marxist-Leninist state.".
 4.   ^  Ideology, Interests, and Identity. Stephen H. Hanson. Page 14. "the USSR was officially a Marxist-Leninist state"
 5.   ^  The Fine Line between the Enforcement of Human Rights Agreements and the Violation of National Sovereignty: The Case of
      Soviet Dissidents. Jennifer Noe Pahre. Page 336. "[...] the Soviet Union, as a Marxist-Leninist state [...]". Page 348. "The
      Soviet Union is a Marxist–Leninist state."
 6.   ^  Leninist National Policy: Solution to the "National Question"?. Walker Connor. Page 31. "[...] four Marxist-Leninist
      states (the Soviet Union, China, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia)[...]"
 7.   ^  The term "successor state of the Soviet Union" for the Russian Federation was laid down in paragraph 3 of article 1 and
      paragraph 7 of article 37 of the Federal law "On international treaties of the Russian Federation" of 15 July 1995 No.
      101-FZ (adopted by the State Duma on 16 June 1995). — See Federal law of July 15, 1995 № 101-FZ On international treaties
      of
      the Russian Federation
 8.   ^  [The case of Mikhail Suprun: the story of political repression as an invasion of privacy 
      http://echo.msk.ru/programs/kulshok/822592-echo/#element-text]
 9.   ^  On 13 January 1992 the Russian MFA has dispatched to heads of diplomatic missions in Moscow a note in which it was stated
      that the Russian Federation continues to exercise rights and perform obligations under all agreements concluded by the USSR.
      On the basis of the specified notes the international community implicitly recognized in the Russian Federation the status
      of a successor state of the USSR. See International treaties in the legal system of the Russian Federation
 10.  ^ a  b  Klein, Henri F. (1920). "Soviet". In Rines, George Edwin. Encyclopedia Americana.
 11.  ^  Russia – Encyclopedia Britannica. Britannica.com (27 April 2010). Retrieved on 29 July 2013.
 12.  ^  Virginia Thompson. "The Former Soviet Union: Physical Geography"  (PDF). Towson University: Department of Geography &
      Environmental Planning. Retrieved 24 March  2016.
 13.  ^  "The causes of the October Revolution". BBC. Retrieved 5 August  2014.
 14.  ^  Evan Mawdsley (1 March 2007). The Russian Civil War. Pegasus Books. p. 287. ISBN978-1-933648-15-6.
 15.  ^  Richard Sakwa The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union, 1917–1991: 1917–1991. Routledge, 1999. ISBN 9780415122900. pp.
      140–143.
 16.  ^  Julian Towster. Political Power in the U.S.S.R., 1917–1947: The Theory and Structure of Government in the Soviet State 
      Oxford Univ. Press, 1948. p. 106.
 17.  ^  (Russian)  Voted Unanimously for the Union.  Archived  4 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
 18.  ^  (Russian)  Creation of the USSR  at Khronos.ru.
 19.  ^  Lapin, G. G. (2000). "70 Years of Gidroproekt and Hydroelectric Power in Russia". Hydrotechnical Construction. 34  (8/9):
      374–379. doi:10.1023/A:1004107617449.
 20.  ^  (Russian)  On GOELRO Plan — at Kuzbassenergo.  Archived  26 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
 21.  ^  The consolidation into a one-party regime took place during the first three and a half years after the revolution, which
      included the period of War communism  and an election in which multiple parties competed. See Leonard Schapiro, The Origin
      of the Communist Autocracy: Political Opposition in the Soviet State, First Phase 1917–1922. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
      University Press, 1955, 1966.
 22.  ^  Lenin, V.I. Collected Works. pp. 152–164, Vol. 31. The proletarian state must effect the transition to collective farming
      with extreme caution and only very gradually, by the force of example, without any coercion of the middle peasant.
 23.  ^  Stéphane Courtois; Mark Kramer (15 October 1999). Livre noir du Communisme: crimes, terreur, répression. Harvard
      University Press. p. 206. ISBN978-0-674-07608-2.
 24.  ^  Abbott Gleason (2009). A companion to Russian history. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 373. ISBN978-1-4051-3560-3.
 25.  ^ a  b  Geoffrey A. Hosking (2001). Russia and the Russians: a history. Harvard University Press. p. 469. ISBN
      978-0-674-00473-3.
 26.  ^  Ukrainian 'Holodomor' (man-made famine) Facts and History. Holodomorct.org (28 November 2006). Retrieved on 29 July 2013.
 27.  ^  (Russian)  Mel'tiukhov, Mikhail. Upushchennyi shans Stalina: Sovietskii Soiuz i bor'ba za Evropu  1939–1941. Moscow:
      Veche, 2000. ISBN 5-7838-1196-3.
 28.  ^  William J. Duiker (31 August 2009). Contemporary World History. Wadsworth Pub Co. p. 128. ISBN978-0-495-57271-8.
 29.  ^  Denunciation of the neutrality pact  5 April 1945. (Avalon Project  at Yale University)
 30.  ^  Soviet Declaration of War on Japan, 8 August 1945. (Avalon Project  at Yale University)
 31.  ^ a  b  Geoffrey A. Hosking (2006). Rulers and victims: the Russians in the Soviet Union. Harvard University Press. p. 242. 
      ISBN978-0-674-02178-5.
 32.  ^  Brinkley, Douglas. The New York Times Living History: World War II, 1942–1945: The Allied Counteroffensive. Macmillan,
      2004.
 33.  ^  Urquhart, Brian. Looking for the Sheriff. New York Review of Books, 16 July 1998.
 34.  ^  "Main Intelligence Administration (GRU) Glavnoye Razvedovatel'noye Upravlenie – Russia / Soviet Intelligence Agencies".
      Fas.org. Retrieved 24 November  2008.
 35.  ^  "Tank on the Moon". The Nature of Things with David Suzuki. 6 December 2007. CBC-TV. Archived from the original  on 26
      December 2008.
 36.  ^  Kenneth S. Deffeyes, Beyond Oil: The View from Hubbert's Peak.
 37.  ^  The red blues — Soviet politics  by Brian Crozier, National Review, 25 June 1990.[dead link]
 38.  ^  Origins of Moral-Ethical Crisis and Ways to Overcome it  by V.A.Drozhin Honoured Lawyer of Russia.
 39.  ^  Country Profile: Russia  Foreign & Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom. Archived  11 March 2008 at the Wayback
      Machine.
 40.  ^  "Child poverty soars in eastern Europe", BBC News, 11 October 2000
 41.  ^  McAaley, Alastair. Russia and the Baltics: Poverty and Poverty Research in a Changing World. Retrieved 18 July  2016.
 42.  ^  "An epidemic of street kids overwhelms Russian cities". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 17 July  2016.
 43.  ^  Targ, Harry (2006). Challenging Late Capitalism, Neoliberal Globalization, & Militarism.
 44.  ^  Theodore P. Gerber & Michael Hout, "More Shock than Therapy: Market Transition, Employment, and Income in Russia,
      1991–1995", AJS Volume 104 Number 1 (July 1998): 1–50.
 45.  ^  Volkov, Vladimir. "The bitter legacy of Boris Yeltsin (1931-2007)".
 46.  ^  "Cops for hire". Economist. 2010. Retrieved 4 December  2015.
 47.  ^  "Corruption Perceptions Index 2014". Transparency International. Retrieved 18 July  2016.
 48.  ^  Hardt, John (2003). Russia's Uncertain Economic Future: With a Comprehensive Subject Index. M. E Sharpe. p. 481.
 49.  ^  Alexander, Catharine; Buchil, Victor; Humphrey, Caroline (12 September 2007). Urban Life in Post-Soviet Asia. CRC Press. 
       |access-date=  requires |url=  (help)
 50.  ^  Smorodinskaya. Encyclopaedia of Contemporary Russian. Routledge.
 51.  ^  Galazkaa, Artur. "Implications of the Diphtheria Epidemic in the Former Soviet Union for Immunization Programs". Journal
      of Infectious Diseases. 181: 244–248. doi:10.1086/315570.
 52.  ^  Shubnikov, Eugene. "Non-communicable Diseases and Former Soviet Union countries". Retrieved 18 July  2016.
 53.  ^  Wharton, Melinda; Vitek, Charles. "Diphtheria in the Former Soviet Union: Reemergence of a Pandemic Disease". CDC: Center
      for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved 18 July  2016.
 54.  ^  Hoepller, C (2011). Russian Demographics: The Role of the Collapse of the Soviet Union.
 55.  ^  Poland, Marshall. "Russian Economy in the Aftermath of the Collapse of the Soviet Union". Retrieved 18 July  2016.
 56.  ^  David Stuckler, Lawrence King, and Martin McKee. "Mass privatisation and the post-communist mortality crisis: a
      cross-national analysis." The Lancet  373.9661 (2009): 399-407.
 57.  ^  Privatisation 'raised death rate'. BBC,  15 January 2009. Retrieved 19 November 2014.
 58.  ^  Vladislav M. Zubok (2009). A Failed Empire: The Soviet Union in the Cold War from Stalin to Gorbachev. Univ of North
      Carolina Press. p. ix.
 59.  ^ a  b  c  Buhler, Konrad G. (2001). State Succession and Membership in International Organizations. Legal Aspects of
      International Organization Series. Volume 38. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 164. ISBN9789041115539.
 60.  ^  Talari, Pekka T. (1996). State Succession in Respect of Debts: The Effect of State Succession in the 1990's on the Rules
      of Law. The Finnish Yearbook of International Law. 2. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 167. ISBN9789041104694.
 61.  ^ a  b  Sakwa, Richard. Soviet Politics in Perspective. 2nd ed. London – N.Y.: Routledge, 1998.
 62.  ^  Law, David A. (1975). Russian Civilization. Ardent Media. pp. 193–94. ISBN978-0-8422-0529-0.
 63.  ^  Zemtsov, Ilya (1989). Chernenko: The Last Bolshevik: The Soviet Union on the Eve of Perestroika. Transaction Publishers.
      p. 325. ISBN978-0-88738-260-4.
 64.  ^  Knight, Amy (1995). Beria: Stalin's First Lieutenant. Princeton University Press. p. 5. ISBN0-691-01093-5.
 65.  ^  Hough, Jerry F.; Fainsod, Merle (1979). How the Soviet Union is Governed. Harvard University Press. p. 486. ISBN
      0-674-41030-0.
 66.  ^  Service, Robert  (2009). History of Modern Russia: From Tsarism to the Twenty-first Century. Penguin Books Ltd. p. 378. 
      ISBN0-14-103797-0.
 67.  ^  Конститутион оф тхе Руссиян Федератион: витх комментариес анд интерпретатион. Brunswick Publishing Corp. 1994. p. 82. 
      ISBN1-55618-142-6.
 68.  ^  Ōgushi, Atsushi (2008). The Demise of the Soviet Communist Party. Routledge. pp. 31–32. ISBN0-415-43439-4.
 69.  ^  Taras, Ray  (1989). Leadership change in Communist states. Routledge. p. 132. ISBN0-04-445277-2.
 70.  ^  F. Triska, Jan; Slusser, Robert M. (1962). The Theory, Law, and Policy of Soviet Treaties. Stanford University Press.
      pp. 63–64. ISBN0-8047-0122-9.
 71.  ^  Deb, Kalipada (1996). Soviet Union to Commonwealth: Transformation and Challenges. M.D. Publications Pvt. Ltd. p. 81. 
      ISBN81-85880-95-6.
 72.  ^ a  b  Benson, Shirley (2001). Nikita Khrushchev and the Creation of a Superpower. Penn State University Press. pp. XIV. 
      ISBN0-271-02170-5.
 73.  ^  The Communist World. Ardent Media. 2001. p. 441. ISBN0-271-02170-5.
 74.  ^  Joseph Marie Feldbrugge, Ferdinand (1993). Russian Law: The End of the Soviet System and the Role of Law. Martinus
      Nijhoff Publishers. p. 205. ISBN0-7923-2358-0.
 75.  ^  White, Stephen; J. Gill, Graeme; Slider, Darrell (1993). The Politics of Transition: Shaping a post-Soviet Future.
      Cambridge University Press. p. 108. ISBN978-0-521-44634-1.
 76.  ^  P. Hoffmann, Erik; Laird, Robin Frederick (1984). The Soviet Polity in the Modern Era. Transaction Publishers.
      pp. 313–315. ISBN0-202-24165-3.
 77.  ^  P. Hoffmann, Erik; Laird, Robin Frederick (1984). The Soviet Polity in the Modern Era. Transaction Publishers.
      pp. 315–319. ISBN0-202-24165-3.
 78.  ^  "The Soviet Polity in the Modern Era". Great Russian Encyclopedia. Bol'shaya Rossiyskaya Enciklopediya Publisher. 1: 742.
      2005.
 79.  ^  Sakwa, Richard  (1998). Soviet Politics in Perspective. Routledge. p. 106. ISBN0-415-07153-4.
 80.  ^  Kucherov, Samuel (1970). The Organs of Soviet Administration of Justice: Their History and Operation. Brill Archive
      Publishers. p. 31.
 81.  ^  Phillips, Steve (2000). Lenin and the Russian Revolution. Heinemann. p. 71. ISBN978-0-435-32719-4.
 82.  ^  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.  2005. p. 1014.
 83.  ^  Service, Robert  (2009). History of Modern Russia: From Tsarism to the Twenty-first Century. Penguin Books Ltd. p. 379. 
      ISBN0-14-103797-0.
 84.  ^ a  b  Khrushchev, Nikita  (2007). Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev, Volume 3: Statesman. Pennsylvania State University Press.
      p. 674. ISBN978-0-271-02935-1.
 85.  ^  Polley, Martin (2000). A–Z of modern Europe since 1789. Routledge. p. 88. ISBN0-415-18597-1.
 86.  ^  "Gorbachev's Reform Dilemma". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 16 October  2010.
 87.  ^  Polmar, Norman (1991). The Naval Institute Guide to the Soviet. United States Naval Institute. p. 1. ISBN0-87021-241-9.
 88.  ^  McCauley, Martin (2007). The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union. Pearson Education. p. 490. ISBN0-582-78465-4.
 89.  ^  Government of the USSR: Gorbachev, Mikhail  (21 March 1972). УКАЗ: ПОЛОЖЕНИЕ О МИНИСТЕРСТВЕ ЮСТИЦИИ СССР [Law: About
      state governing bodies of USSR in a transition period On the bodies
      of state authority and administration of the USSR in Transition]  (in Russian). sssr.su. Retrieved 15 October  1991.  Check
      date values in: |access-date=  (help)
 90.  ^  Vincent Daniels, Robert (1993). A Documentary History of Communism in Russia: From Lenin to Gorbachev. University Press
      of New England  (UPNE). p. 388. ISBN0-87451-616-1.
 91.  ^  Encyclopædia Britannica. "Inquisitorial procedure (law) – Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. 
       Retrieved 30 October  2010.
 92.  ^  Adams, Simon (2005). Russian Republics. Black Rabbit Books. p. 21. ISBN978-1-58340-606-9.
 93.  ^  Feldbrugge, Ferdinand Joseph Maria (1993). Russian Law: The Rnd of the Soviet system and the Role of Law. Martinus
      Nijhoff Publishers. p. 94. ISBN0-7923-2358-0.
 94.  ^  White, Matthew  (2012). The Great Big Book of Horrible Things. W. W. Norton. p. 368. ISBN9780393081923.
 95.  ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  Gregory, Paul R. (2004). The Political Economy of Stalinism: Evidence from the Soviet Secret Archives.
      Cambridge University Press. pp. 218–20. ISBN0-521-53367-8.
 96.  ^  Mawdsley, Evan (1998). The Stalin Years: The Soviet Union, 1929–1953. Manchester University Press. p. 30. ISBN
      0-7190-4600-9.
 97.  ^  Wheatcroft, S. G.; Davies, R. W.; Cooper, J. M. (1986). Soviet Industrialization Reconsidered: Some Preliminary
      Conclusions about Economic Development between 1926 and 1941. 39. Economic History Review. pp. 30–2. ISBN978-0-7190-4600-1.
 98.  ^  "Reconstruction and Cold War". Library of Congress. Retrieved 23 October  2010.
 99.  ^ a  b  c  d  "Reconstruction and Cold War". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 23 October  2010.
 100. ^  IMF  and OECD  (1991). A Study of the Soviet Economy. 1. International Monetary Fund. p. 9. ISBN0-14-103797-0.
 101. ^ a  b  "Economy". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 23 October  2010.
 102. ^ a  b  Hanson, Philip. The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Economy: An Economic History of the USSR from 1945. London: Longman,
      2003.
 103. ^  Bergson, Abram (1997). "How Big was the Soviet GDP?". Comparative Economic Studies. 39  (1): 1–14. doi:10.1057/ces.1997.1
      .
 104. ^  Harrison, Mark (1993). "Soviet Economic Growth Since 1928: The Alternative Statistics of G. I. Khanin". Europe–Asia
      Studies. 45  (1): 141–167. doi:10.1080/09668139308412080.
 105. ^  Gvosdev, Nikolas  (2008). The Strange Death of Soviet communism: A Postscript. Transaction Publishers. ISBN1-4128-0698-4.
 106. ^  Fischer, Stanley; Easterly, William  (1994). "The Soviet Economic Decline, Historical and Republican Data"  (PDF). World
      Bank. Retrieved 23 October  2010.
 107. ^  Rosefielde, Steven (1996). "Stalinism in Post-Communist Perspective: New Evidence on Killings, Forced Labour and Economic
      Growth in the 1930s". Europe-Asia Studies. Taylor & Francis, Ltd. 48  (6): 956–987. JSTOR152635. The new evidence shows that
      administrative command planning and Stalin's forced industrialization strategies failed in the 1930s and beyond. The
      economic miracle chronicled in official hagiographies and until recently faithfully recounted in Western textbooks has no
      basis in fact. It is the statistical artefact not of index number relativity (the Gerschenkron effect) but of misapplying to
      the calculation of growth cost prices that do not accurately measure competitive value. The standard of living declined
      during the 1930s in response to Stalin's despotism, and after a brief improvement following his death, lapsed into
      stagnation. Glasnost and post-communist revelations interpreted as a whole thus provide no basis for Getty, Rittersporn &
      Zemskov's relatively favourable characterization of the methods, economic achievements and human costs of Stalinism. The
      evidence demonstrates that the suppression of markets and the oppression of vast segments of the population were
      economically counterproductive and humanly calamitous, just as anyone conversant with classical economic theory should have
      expected.
 108. ^  Central Intelligence Agency  (1991). "GDP – Million 1990". The World Factbook. Retrieved 12 June  2010.
 109. ^  Central Intelligence Agency  (1992). "GDP Per Capita – 1991". The World Factbook. Retrieved 12 June  2010.
 110. ^  "A Beginner's Guide to Soviet Industrialization". Waiting for Putney. 28 October 2013. Retrieved 18 October  2016.
 111. ^  "Human Development Report 1990 | Human Development Reports". hdr.undp.org. Retrieved 18 October  2016.
 112. ^  Wilson, David (1983). The Demand for Energy in the Soviet Union. Rowman and Littfield. pp. 105 to 108. ISBN9780709927044.
 113. ^  Wilson 1983, p. 295.
 114. ^  Wilson 1983, p. 297.
 115. ^  Wilson 1983, p. 297–99.
 116. ^  Wilson 1983, p. 299.
 117. ^ a  b  c  Central Intelligence Agency  (1991). "Soviet Union – Communications". The World Factbook. Retrieved 20 October 
      2010.
 118. ^  Central Intelligence Agency  (1992). "Soviet Union – Economy". The World Factbook. Retrieved 23 October  2010.
 119. ^  Hardt, John Pearce; Hardt, John P. (2003). Russia's Uncertain Economic Future: With a Comprehensive Subject Index. M.E.
      Sharpe. p. 233. ISBN0-7656-1208-9.
 120. ^  "Science and Technology". Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 23 October  2010.
 121. ^  Rose Eveleth (12 December 2013). Soviet Russia Had a Better Record of Training Women in STEM Than America Does Today. 
      Smithsonian.com.  Retrieved 26 June 2014.
 122. ^  MacFarland, Margo (3 May 1990). "Global Tech Strategies Brought to U.S". Washington Technology.
 123. ^  Deckert, R.A. (10 October 1990). "The science of uncovering industrial information". Business Journal of the Treasure
      Coast.
 124. ^  "U.S. Firms Must Trade Short-Term Gains for Long-Term Technology Planning". Inside the Pentagon. 7 March 1991.
 125. ^  Highman, Robert D.S.; Greenwood, John T.; Hardesty, Von (1998). Russian Aviation and Air Power in the Twentieth Century.
      Routledge. p. 134. ISBN978-0-7146-4784-5.
 126. ^ a  b  Wilson 1983, p. 205.
 127. ^  Wilson 1983, p. 201.
 128. ^  Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 166–67.
 129. ^  Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 168.
 130. ^  Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 165.
 131. ^ a  b  Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 167.
 132. ^  Ambler, Shaw and Symons 1985, p. 169.
 133. ^  International Monetary Fund  and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  1991, p. 56.
 134. ^  Mark Harrison (18 July 2002). Accounting for War: Soviet Production, Employment, and the Defence Burden, 1940–1945.
      Cambridge University Press. p. 167. ISBN978-0-521-89424-1.
 135. ^  Jay Winter; Emmanuel Sivan (2000). War and Remembrance in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge University Press. p. 64. ISBN
      0521794366.
 136. ^  Government of the USSR  (1977). Большая советская энциклопедия  [Great Soviet Encyclopaedia] (in Russian). 24. Moscow: 
      State Committee for Publishing. p. 15.
 137. ^  Anderson, Barbara A. (1990). Growth and Diversity of the Population of the Soviet Union. 510. Annals of the American
      Academy of Political and Social Sciences. pp. 155–77.
 138. ^  Vallin, J.; Chesnais, J.C. (1970). Recent Developments of Mortality in Europe, English-Speaking Countries and the Soviet
      Union, 1960–1970. 29. Population Studies. pp. 861–898.
 139. ^  Ryan, Michael (28 May 1988). Life Expectancy and Mortality Data from the Soviet Union. British Medical Journal. 296.
      p. 1,513–1515.
 140. ^  Davis, Christopher; Feshbach, Murray. Rising Infant Mortality in the USSR in the 1970s. Washington, D.C.: United States
      Census Bureau. p. 95.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
 141. ^  Krimins, Juris (3–7 December 1990). The Changing Mortality Patterns in Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia: Experience of the
      Past Three Decades.  Paper presented at the International Conference on Health, Morbidity and Mortality by Cause of Death in
      Europe.
 142. ^  Sheila Fitzpatrick, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union 1921–1934, Cambridge University Press  (16 May
      2002), ISBN 0521894239
 143. ^  Law, David A. (1975). Russian Civilization. Ardent Media. pp. 300–1. ISBN0-8422-0529-2.
 144. ^  Mikhail Shifman, ed. (2005). You Failed Your Math Test, Comrade Einstein: Adventures and Misadventures of Young
      Mathematicians Or Test Your Skills in Almost Recreational Mathematics. World Scientific.
 145. ^  Edward Frenkel  (October 2012). "The Fifth problem: math & anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union". The New Criterion.
 146. ^  Dominic Lawson  (11 October 2011). "More migrants please, especially the clever ones". The Independent. London.
 147. ^  Andre Geim  (2010). "Biographical". Nobelprize.org.
 148. ^  Shlapentokh, Vladimir (1990). Soviet Intellectuals and Political Power: The Post-Stalin Era. I.B. Tauris. p. 26. ISBN
      978-1-85043-284-5.
 149. ^  Pejovich, Svetozar (1990). The Economics of Property Rights: Towards a Theory of Comparative Systems. Springer
      Science+Business Media. p. 130. ISBN978-0-7923-0878-2.
 150. ^  Central Intelligence Agency  (1991). "Soviet Union – People". The World Factbook. Retrieved 25 October  2010.
 151. ^  Comrie 1981, p. 2.
 152. ^  Comrie 1981, p. 3.
 153. ^  Hosking, Geoffrey (13 March 2006). "Rulers and Victims: The Russians in the Soviet Union". History Today. Retrieved 25
      October  2010.  (pay-fee)
 154. ^  Lane 1992, p. 353.
 155. ^  Lane 1992, p. 352.
 156. ^  Lane 1992, p. 352–53.
 157. ^  Dinkel, R.H. (1990). The Seeming Paradox of Increasing Mortality in a Highly Industrialized Nation: the Example of the
      Soviet Union. pp. 155–77.
 158. ^  Comrie 1981, p. 3–4.
 159. ^  Comrie 1981, p. 4.
 160. ^  Comrie 1981, p. 25.
 161. ^  Comrie 1981, p. 26.
 162. ^  Comrie 1981, p. 27.
 163. ^  ЗАКОН СССР ОТ 24 April 1990 О ЯЗЫКАХ НАРОДОВ СССР [Law of the USSR from 24 April 1990 On languages of the USSR]  (in
      Russian). Government of the Soviet Union. 24 April 1990. Retrieved 24 October  2010.
 164. ^  20% Russian Orthodox; 10% Muslim; 7% Protestant, Armenian Apostolic, Georgian Orthodox, and Roman Catholic; less than 1%
      Jewish; 60% atheist
 165. ^ a  b  c  Eaton, Katherine Bliss (2004). Daily life in the Soviet Union. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 285 and 286. ISBN
      0-313-31628-7.
 166. ^  Silvio Ferrari; W. Cole Durham; Elizabeth A. Sewell (2003). Law and religion in post-communist Europe. Peeters Pub &
      Booksellers. p. 261. ISBN978-90-429-1262-5.
 167. ^ a  b  c  d  Simon 1974, pp. 64–65.
 168. ^  Simon 1974, p. 209.
 169. ^  Atwood, Craig D. (2001). Always Reforming: A History of Christianity Since 1300. Macon, Georgia: Mercer University Press.
      p. 311. ISBN0-86554-679-7.
 170. ^ a  b  c  Janz 1998, pp. 38–39.
 171. ^  Ro'i, Yaacov (1995). Jews and Jewish Life in Russia and the Soviet Union. London: Frank Cass. p. 263. ISBN0-7146-4619-9.
 172. ^ a  b  Nahaylo, Bohdan & Victor Swoboda (1990). Soviet Disunion: A History of the Nationalities Problem in the USSR.
      London: Hamish Hamilton. p. 144. ISBN0-02-922401-2.
 173. ^  Mark D. Steinberg; Catherine Wanner (October 2008). Religion, morality, and community in post-Soviet societies. Indiana
      University Press. p. 6. ISBN978-0-253-22038-7.
 174. ^  Janz 1998, p. 42.
 175. ^  McKay, George; Williams, Christopher (2009). Subcultures and New Religious Movements in Russia and East-Central Europe. 
      Peter Lang. pp. 231–32. ISBN3-03911-921-4.
 176. ^  Warshofsky Lapidus 1978, p.3.
 177. ^  'On the other hand...' See the index of Stalin and His Hangmen  by Donald Rayfield, 2004, Random House
 178. ^  Rayfield 2004, pp. 317–320.
 179. ^  "Gorbachev, Mikhail." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 2 October 2007 <
      http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9037405>. "Under his new policy of glasnost ("openness"), a major cultural thaw took
      place: freedoms of expression and of information were significantly expanded; the press and broadcasting were allowed
      unprecedented candour in their reportage and criticism; and the country's legacy of Stalinist totalitarian rule was
      eventually completely repudiated by the government."

BIBLIOGRAPHY
 * Ambler, John; Shaw, Denis J.B.; Symons, Leslie (1985). Soviet and East European Transport Problems. Taylor & Francis. ISBN
   978-0-7099-0557-8.
 * Comrie, Bernard  (1981). The Languages of the Soviet Union. Cambridge University Press (CUP) Archive. ISBN978-0-521-29877-3.
 * Janz, Denis (1998). World Christianity and Marxism. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN978-0-19-511944-2.
 * Lane, David Stuart (1992). Soviet Society under Perestroika. Routledge. ISBN978-0-415-07600-5.
 * Rayfield, Donald  (2004). Stalin and His Hangmen: An Authoritative Portrait of a Tyrant and Those Who Served Him. Viking Press.
    ISBN978-0-375-75771-6.
 * Simon, Gerard (1974). Church, State, and Opposition in the U.S.S.R.  Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
   ISBN978-0-520-02612-4.
 * Wilson, David (1983). The Demand for Energy in the Soviet Union. Taylor & Francis. ISBN978-0-7099-2704-4.
 * World Bank  and OECD  (1991). A Study of the Soviet economy. 3. International Monetary Fund. ISBN9789264134683.
 * Palat, Madhavan K.  (2001). Social Identities in Revolutionary Russia. UK: Palgrave. ISBN978-0-333-92947-6. Retrieved 26 May 
   2012.
 * Warshofsky Lapidus, Gail (1978). Women in Soviet Society: Equality, Development, and Social Change. Berkeley, CA: University
   of
   California Press. ISBN978-0-520-03938-4.

FURTHER READING
See also: List of primary and secondary sources on the Cold WarSURVEYS
 * A Country Study: Soviet Union (Former). Library of Congress Country Studies, 1991.
 * Brown, Archie, et al., eds.: The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Russia and the Soviet Union  (Cambridge University Press, 1982).
 * Gilbert, Martin. Routledge Atlas of Russian History  (4th ed. 2007) excerpt and text search
 * Gorodetsky, Gabriel, ed. Soviet Foreign Policy, 1917–1991: A Retrospective  (2014)
 * Grant, Ted. Russia, from Revolution to Counter-Revolution, London, Well Red Publications, 1997
 * Hosking, Geoffrey. The First Socialist Society: A History of the Soviet Union from Within  (2nd ed. Harvard UP 1992) 570pp
 * Howe, G. Melvyn: The Soviet Union: A Geographical Survey  2nd. edn. (Estover, UK: MacDonald and Evans, 1983).
 * Kort, Michael. The Soviet Colossus: History and Aftermath  (7th ed. 2010) 502pp
 * McCauley, Martin. The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union  (2007), 522 pages.
 * Moss, Walter G. A History of Russia. Vol. 2: Since 1855. 2d ed. Anthem Press, 2005.
 * Nove, Alec. An Economic History of the USSR, 1917–1991. (3rd ed. 1993)
 * Pipes, Richard. Communism: A History  (2003)
 * Service, Robert. A History of Twentieth-Century Russia. (2nd ed. 1999)

LENIN AND LENINISM
 * Clark, Ronald W. Lenin  (1988). 570 pp.
 * Debo, Richard K. Survival and Consolidation: The Foreign Policy of Soviet Russia, 1918–1921  (1992).
 * Marples, David R. Lenin's Revolution: Russia, 1917–1921  (2000) 156pp. short survey
 * Pipes, Richard. A Concise History of the Russian Revolution  (1996) excerpt and text search, by a leading conservative
 * Pipes, Richard. Russia under the Bolshevik Regime.  (1994). 608 pp.
 * Service, Robert. Lenin: A Biography  (2002), 561pp; standard scholarly biography; a short version of his 3 vol detailed
   biography
 * Volkogonov, Dmitri. Lenin: Life and Legacy  (1994). 600 pp.

STALIN AND STALINISM
 * Daniels, R. V., ed. The Stalin Revolution  (1965)
 * Davies, Sarah, and James Harris, eds. Stalin: A New History,  (2006), 310pp, 14 specialized essays by scholars excerpt and
   text
   search
 * De Jonge, Alex. Stalin and the Shaping of the Soviet Union  (1986)
 * Fitzpatrick, Sheila, ed. Stalinism: New Directions,  (1999), 396pp excerpts from many scholars on the impact of Stalinism on
   the people (little on Stalin himself) online edition
 * Fitzpatrick, Sheila. "Impact of the Opening of Soviet Archives on Western Scholarship on Soviet Social History." Russian Review 
    74#3 (2015): 377–400; historiography
 * Hoffmann, David L. ed. Stalinism: The Essential Readings,  (2002) essays by 12 scholars
 * Laqueur, Walter. Stalin: The Glasnost Revelations  (1990)
 * Kershaw, Ian, and Moshe Lewin. Stalinism and Nazism: Dictatorships in Comparison  (2004) excerpt and text search
 * Lee, Stephen J. Stalin and the Soviet Union  (1999) online edition
 * Lewis, Jonathan. Stalin: A Time for Judgement  (1990)
 * McNeal, Robert H. Stalin: Man and Ruler  (1988)
 * Martens, Ludo. Another view of Stalin  (1994), a highly favorable view from a Maoist historian
 * Service, Robert. Stalin: A Biography  (2004), along with Tucker the standard biography
 * Trotsky, Leon. Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man and His Influence,  (1967), an interpretation by Stalin's worst enemy
 * Tucker, Robert C. Stalin as Revolutionary, 1879–1929  (1973); Stalin in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1929–1941.  (1990) 
   online edition  with Service, a standard biography; online at ACLS e-books

WORLD WAR II
 * Barber, John, and Mark Harrison. The Soviet Home Front: A Social and Economic History of the USSR in World War II,  Longman,
   1991.
 * Bellamy, Chris. Absolute War: Soviet Russia in the Second World War  (2008), 880pp excerpt and text search
 * Berkhoff, Karel C.  Harvest of Despair: Life and Death in Ukraine Under Nazi Rule.  Harvard U. Press, 2004. 448 pp.
 * Berkhoff, Karel C. Motherland in Danger: Soviet Propaganda during World War II  (2012) excerpt and text search  covers both
   propaganda and reality of homefront conditions
 * Braithwaite, Rodric. Moscow 1941: A City and Its People at War  (2006)
 * Broekmeyer, Marius. Stalin, the Russians, and Their War, 1941–1945.  2004. 315 pp.
 * Dallin, Alexander. Odessa, 1941–1944: A Case Study of Soviet Territory under Foreign Rule.  Portland: Int. Specialized Book
   Service, 1998. 296 pp.
 * Kucherenko, Olga. Little Soldiers: How Soviet Children Went to War, 1941–1945  (2011) excerpt and text search
 * Overy, Richard. Russia's War: A History of the Soviet Effort: 1941–1945  (1998) 432pp excerpt and txt search
 * Overy, Richard. Russia's War: A History of the Soviet Effort: 1941–1945  (1998) excerpt and text search
 * Roberts, Geoffrey. Stalin's Wars: From World War to Cold War, 1939–1953  (2006).
 * Schofield, Carey, ed. Russian at War, 1941–1945. Text by Georgii Drozdov and Evgenii Ryabko, [with] introd. by Vladimir Karpov
   [and] pref. by Harrison E. Salisbury, ed. by Carey Schofield. New York: Vendome Press, 1987. 256 p., copiously ill. with b&2
   photos and occasional maps. N.B.: This is mostly a photo-history, with connecting texts. ISBN 978-0-86565-077-0
 * Seaton, Albert. Stalin as Military Commander,  (1998) online edition
 * Thurston, Robert W., and Bernd Bonwetsch, eds. The People's War: Responses to World War II in the Soviet Union  (2000)
 * Vallin, Jacques; Meslé, France; Adamets, Serguei; and Pyrozhkov, Serhii. "A New Estimate of Ukrainian Population Losses During
   the Crises of the 1930s and 1940s." Population Studies  (2002) 56(3): 249–264. in JSTOR  Reports life expectancy at birth fell
   to a level as low as ten years for females and seven for males in 1933 and plateaued around 25 for females and 15 for males in
   the period 1941–44.

COLD WAR
 * Brzezinski, Zbigniew. The Grand Failure: The Birth and Death of Communism in the Twentieth Century  (1989)
 * Edmonds, Robin. Soviet Foreign Policy: The Brezhnev Years  (1983)
 * Goncharov, Sergei, John Lewis and Litai Xue, Uncertain Partners: Stalin, Mao and the Korean War  (1993) excerpt and text search
 * Gorlizki, Yoram, and Oleg Khlevniuk. Cold Peace: Stalin and the Soviet Ruling Circle, 1945–1953  (2004) online edition
 * Holloway, David. Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939–1956  (1996) excerpt and text search
 * Mastny, Vojtech. Russia's Road to the Cold War: Diplomacy, Warfare, and the Politics of Communism, 1941–1945  (1979)
 * Mastny, Vojtech. The Cold War and Soviet Insecurity: The Stalin Years  (1998) excerpt and text search; online complete edition
 * Nation, R. Craig. Black Earth, Red Star: A History of Soviet Security Policy, 1917–1991  (1992)
 * Sivachev, Nikolai and Nikolai Yakolev, Russia and the United States  (1979), by Soviet historians
 * Taubman, William. Khrushchev: The Man and His Era  (2004), Pulitzer Prize; excerpt and text search
 * Ulam, Adam B. Expansion and Coexistence: Soviet Foreign Policy, 1917–1973, 2nd ed. (1974)
 * Zubok, Vladislav M. Inside the Kremlin's Cold War  (1996) 20% excerpt and online search
 * Zubok, Vladislav M. A Failed Empire: The Soviet Union in the Cold War from Stalin to Gorbachev  (2007)

COLLAPSE
 * Beschloss, Michael, and Strobe Talbott. At the Highest Levels:The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War  (1993)
 * Bialer, Seweryn and Michael Mandelbaum, eds. Gorbachev's Russia and American Foreign Policy  (1988).
 * Carrère d'Encausse, Hélène. Decline of an Empire: the Soviet Socialist Republics in Revolt. First English language ed. New
   York: Newsweek Books (1979). 304 p. N.B.: Trans. of the author's L'Empire éclaté. ISBN 0-88225-280-1
 * Garthoff, Raymond. The Great Transition: American–Soviet Relations and the End of the Cold War  (1994), detailed narrative
 * Grachev, A.S. Gorbachev's Gamble: Soviet Foreign Policy and the End of the Cold War  (2008) excerpt and text search
 * Hogan, Michael ed. The End of the Cold War. Its Meaning and Implications  (1992) articles from Diplomatic History
 * Roger Keeran  and Thomas Keeny. Socialism Betrayed: Behind the Collapse of the Soviet Union, International Publishers Co Inc.,
   U.S. 2004
 * Kotkin, Stephen. Armageddon Averted: The Soviet Collapse, 1970–2000  (2008) excerpt and text search
 * Matlock, Jack. Autopsy on an Empire: The American Ambassador's Account of the Collapse of the Soviet Union  (1995)
 * Pons, S., Romero, F., Reinterpreting the End of the Cold War: Issues, Interpretations, Periodizations, (2005) ISBN
   0-7146-5695-X
 * Remnick, David. Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, (1994), ISBN 0-679-75125-4
 * Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. Rebuilding Russia: Reflections and Tentative Proposals, trans. and annotated by Alexis Klimoff. First
   ed. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1991. N.B.: Also discusses the other national constituents of the U.S.S.R. ISBN
   0-374-17342-7

SPECIALTY STUDIES
 * Armstrong, John A. The Politics of Totalitarianism: The Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1934 to the Present.  New
   York: Random House, 1961.
 * Katz, Zev, ed.: Handbook of Major Soviet Nationalities  (New York: Free Press, 1975).
 * Moore, Jr., Barrington. Soviet politics: the dilemma of power.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1950.
 * Rizzi, Bruno: The Bureaucratization of the World: The First English edition of the Underground Marxist Classic That Analyzed
   Class Exploitation in the USSR, New York, NY: Free Press, 1985.
 * Schapiro, Leonard B. The Origin of the Communist Autocracy: Political Opposition in the Soviet State, First Phase 1917–1922. 
   Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955, 1966.

 This article incorporatespublic domain material  from the Library of Congress Country Studies  website 
http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/.

EXTERNAL LINKS
Find more aboutSoviet Unionat Wikipedia's sister projects * Definitions  from Wiktionary
 * Media  from Commons
 * Quotations  from Wikiquote
 * Texts  from Wikisource
 * Travel guide  from Wikivoyage

 *   Wikimedia Atlas of the Soviet Union
 * Impressions of Soviet Russia, by John Dewey.
 * Documents and other forms of media from the Soviet Union: 1917–1991.
 * A Country Study: Soviet Union (Former)
 * Soviet Union Exhibit at Global Museum on Communism with essay by Richard Pipes
 * Majority in former Soviet states believe breakup was harmful mistake – poll. RT, 21 December 2013.

 * v
 * t
 * e

Soviet Union  topics * 
 * Index
 * 

History * Russian Revolution * February
    * October
   
   
 * Russian Civil War
 * Russian SFSR
 * USSR creation treaty
 * New Economic Policy
 * Stalinism
 * Great Purge
 * Great Patriotic War  (World War II)
 * Cold War
 * Khrushchev Thaw
 * 1965 reform
 * Stagnation
 * Perestroika
 * Glasnost
 * Revolutions of 1989
 * Dissolution
 * Nostalgia
 * Post-Soviet states

GeographySubdivisions * Republics * autonomous
   
   
 * Oblasts * autonomous
   
   
 * Autonomous okrugs
 * Closed cities * list
   
   

Regions * Caspian Sea
 * Caucasus Mountains
 * European Russia
 * North Caucasus
 * Siberia
 * Ural Mountains
 * West Siberian Plain

PoliticsGeneral * Constitution
 * Elections
 * Foreign relations * Brezhnev Doctrine
   
   
 * Government * list
   
   
 * Human rights * LGBT
   
   
 * Law
 * Leaders * Collective leadership
   
   
 * Passport system
 * State ideology * Marxism–Leninism
    * Leninism
    * Stalinism
   
   

Bodies * Communist Party * organisation
    * Central Committee * Politburo
       * Secretariat
      
      
    * Congress
    * General Secretary
   
   
 * Congress of Soviets (1922–1936)
 * Supreme Soviet (1938–1991)
 * Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991)
 * Supreme Court

Offices * Premier
 * President
 * Deputy Premier
 * First Deputy Premier

Security services * Cheka
 * GPU
 * NKVD
 * MVD
 * MGB
 * KGB

Political repression * Red Terror
 * Collectivization
 * Great Purge
 * Population transfer
 * Gulag * list
   
   
 * Holodomor
 * Political abuse of psychiatry

Ideological repression * Religion
 * Suppressed research
 * Censorship
 * Censorship of images

Economy * Agriculture
 * Central Bank
 * Energy policy
 * Five-Year Plans
 * Net material product
 * Inventions
 * Ruble (currency)
 * Internet domain
 * Transport

Science * Communist Academy
 * Academy of Sciences
 * Academy of Medical Sciences
 * Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences
 * Academy of Pedagogical Sciences
 * Sharashkas
 * Naukograds * list
   
   

Society * Crime
 * Demographics * Soviet people
    * working class
    * 1989 census
   
   
 * Languages * Linguistics
   
   

Culture * Ballet
 * Cinema
 * Fashion
 * Literature
 * Music * opera
   
   
 * Propaganda
 * Sports
 * Stalinist architecture

Opposition * Soviet dissidents  and their groups * list
   
   

 * Anthem
 * Emblem * republics
   
   
 * Flag * republics
   
   

Templates * Departments
 * Russian Revolution 1917
 * Joseph Stalin
 * Stagnation Era
 * Fall of Communism

 *   Book
 *   Category
 *   Commons
 *   Portal
 *   WikiProject

Administrative division of the Soviet Union * v
 * t
 * e

Republics of the  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics  (1922–1991)Principal * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Byelorussia
 * Estonia1
 * Georgia
 * Kazakhstan
 * Kirghizia
 * Latvia1
 * Lithuania1
 * Moldavia
 * Russian SFSR
 * Tajikistan
 * Turkmenistan
 * Ukraine
 * Uzbekistan

Short-lived * Karelo-Finnish SSR  (1940–1956)
 * Transcaucasian SFSR  (1922–1936)

Not union republics * SSR Abkhazia  (1921–1931)
 * Bukharan SSR  (1920–1925)
 * Khorezm SSR  (1920–1925)
 * Nakhichevan ASSR  (1920-1923)
 * Pridnestrovian Moldavian SSR  (1990–1991)
 * South Ossetian SR  (1990-1991)

1The annexation of the Baltic republics  in 1940 was considered as an illegal occupation and was not recognized by the majority of
the international community such as the United States, United Kingdom  and the European Community. The Soviet Union officially
recognized their independence on September 6, 1991, prior to its final dissolution three months later. * v
 * t
 * e

Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics of the Soviet UnionSoviet UnionBy name * Abkhaz
 * Adjar
 * Bashkir
 * Buryat1
 * Chechen-Ingush
 * Chuvash
 * Crimean
 * Dagestan
 * Gorno-Altai
 * Kabardin
 * Kabardino-Balkar
 * Kalmyk
 * Karakalpak
 * Karelian
 * Kazak2 * Kirghiz2
   
   
 * Kirghiz
 * Komi
 * Mari
 * Moldavian
 * Mordovian
 * Mountain
 * Nakhchivan
 * North Ossetian
 * Tajik
 * Tatar
 * Turkestan
 * Tuva
 * Udmurt
 * Volga German
 * Yakut

By year
established1918–1924Turkestan
1918–1941Volga German
1919–1990Bashkir
1920–1925Kirghiz2
1920–1990Tatar
1921–1990Adjar
1921–1945Crimean
1921–1991Dagestan
1921–1924Mountain

1921–1990Nakhchivan
1922–1991Yakut
1923–1990Buryat1
1923–1940Karelian
1924–1940Moldavian
1924–1929Tajik
1925–1992Chuvash
1925–1936Kazak2
1926–1936Kirghiz

1931–1991Abkhaz
1932–1992Karakalpak
1934–1990Mordovian
1934–1990Udmurt
1935–1943Kalmyk
1936–1944Chechen-Ingush
1936–1944Kabardino-Balkar
1936–1990Komi
1936–1990Mari

1936–1990North Ossetian
1944–1957Kabardin
1956–1991Karelian
1957–1990Chechen-Ingush
1957–1991Kabardino-Balkar
1958–1990Kalmyk
1961–1992Tuva
1990–1991Gorno-Altai
1991–1992Crimean

1  Buryat–Mongol  until 1958.
2  Kazak ASSR  was called Kirghiz ASSR  until 1925. * v
 * t
 * e

Autonomous oblasts of the Soviet UnionSoviet Union * Adyghe
 * Chechen–Ingush * Chechen
    * Ingush
   
   
 * Chuvash
 * Gorno-Altai
 * Gorno-Badakhshan
 * Jewish
 * Kabardino-Balkar
 * Kalmyk
 * Kara-Kirghiz
 * Karachay-Cherkess * Cherkess
    * Karachay
   
   
 * Kara-Kalpak
 * Komi-Zyryan
 * Khakas
 * Mari
 * Moldavian
 * Nagorno-Karabakh
 * North Ossetian
 * South Ossetian
 * Tuvan
 * Udmurt

 * v
 * t
 * e

Socialism  by countryHistory by country * Australia
 * Brazil
 * Canada
 * Estonia
 * France
 * Hong Kong
 * India
 * Netherlands
 * New Zealand
 * Pakistan
 * United Kingdom
 * United States

Regional variants * African
 * Arab
 * British
 * Burmese
 * Chinese
 * Israeli
 * Melanesian
 * Nicaraguan
 * Venezuelan

Communist StatesAfrica * Angola
 * Benin
 * Republic of the Congo
 * Ethiopia (1974–87)
 * Ethiopia (1987–91)
 * Mali (1960-68)
 * Mozambique
 * Somalia

Americas * Cuba
 * Grenada

Asia * Afghanistan
 * Cambodia (1979–93)
 * Cambodia (1976–79)
 * China
 * North Korea
 * Laos
 * Mongolia
 * Tuva
 * Vietnam * North Vietnam
   
   
 * South Yemen

Short-lived * Gilan
 * Iranian Azerbaijan
 * Kurdish Republic of Mahabad
 * South Vietnam

Europe * Albania
 * Bulgaria
 * Czechoslovakia
 * East Germany
 * Hungary (1949–89)
 * Poland
 * Romania
 * Soviet Union * Byelorussia
    * Ukraine
   
   
 * Yugoslavia

Short-lived * Alsace
 * Bavaria
 * Bremen
 * Finland
 * Hungary (1919)
 * Galicia
 * Ireland
 * Slovakia (1919)

 * v
 * t
 * e

Eastern Bloc * Soviet Union
 * Communism

Formation * Secret Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact protocol
 * Soviet invasion of Poland
 * Soviet occupations * Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina
    * Baltic states
    * Hungary
    * Romania
   
   
 * Yalta Conference

Annexed as, or
into, SSRs * Eastern Finland
 * Estonia
 * Latvia
 * Lithuania
 * Memel
 * East Prussia
 * West Belarus
 * Western Ukraine
 * Moldavia

Satellite states * Hungarian People's Republic
 * People's Republic of Poland
 * Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
 * Romanian People's Republic/Socialist Republic of Romania
 * German Democratic Republic
 * People's Republic of Albania (to 1961)
 * People's Republic of Bulgaria
 * Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia (to 1948)

Annexing SSRs * Russian SFSR
 * Ukrainian SSR
 * Byelorussian SSR

Organizations * Cominform
 * COMECON
 * Warsaw Pact
 * World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU)
 * World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY)

Revolts and
opposition * Welles Declaration
 * Goryani Movement
 * Forest Brothers
 * Ukrainian Insurgent Army
 * Operation Jungle
 * Baltic state continuity
 * Baltic Legations (1940–1991)
 * Cursed soldiers
 * Rebellion of Cazin 1950
 * 1953 uprising in Plzeň
 * 1953 East German uprising
 * 1956 Georgian demonstrations
 * 1956 Poznań protests
 * 1956 Hungarian Revolution
 * Novocherkassk massacre
 * 1965 Yerevan demonstrations
 * Prague Spring  / Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
 * Brezhnev Doctrine
 * 1968 Red Square demonstration
 * 1968 student demonstrations in Belgrade
 * 1968 protests in Kosovo
 * 1970 Polish protests
 * Croatian Spring
 * 1972 unrest in Lithuania SSR
 * June 1976 protests
 * Solidarity  / Soviet reaction  / Martial law
 * 1981 protests in Kosovo
 * Reagan Doctrine
 * Jeltoqsan
 * Karabakh movement
 * April 9 tragedy
 * Romanian Revolution
 * Black January

Cold War  events * Marshall Plan
 * Berlin Blockade
 * Tito–Stalin split
 * 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
 * 1961 Berlin Wall crisis

Conditions * Emigration and defection  (list of defectors)
 * Sovietization of the Baltic states
 * Information dissemination
 * Politics
 * Economies
 * Telephone tapping

Decline * Revolutions of 1989
 * Fall of the Berlin Wall
 * Romanian Revolution
 * Fall of communism in Albania
 * Singing Revolution
 * Collapse of the Soviet Union
 * Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
 * January 1991 events in Lithuania
 * January 1991 events in Latvia

Post-Cold War topics * Baltic Assembly
 * CSTO
 * Commonwealth of Independent States
 * Craiova Group
 * European Union  (expansion to Eastern Europe)
 * Eurasian Economic Union
 * NATO  (expansion to Eastern Europe)
 * Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
 * Visegrad Group
 * European migrant crisis

 * v
 * t
 * e

Russia articlesHistoryTimeline * Proto-Indo-Europeans
 * Scythians
 * East Slavs
 * Rus' Khaganate
 * Kievan Rus'
 * Novgorod Republic
 * Vladimir-Suzdal
 * Grand Duchy of Moscow
 * Tsardom of Russia
 * Russian Empire
 * Russian Republic
 * Russian SFSR
 * Soviet Union
 * Russian Federation

By topic * Economy
 * Military
 * Journalism  ‎
 * Postal

Geography * Subdivisions
 * Borders
 * Geology
 * European Russia
 * Caucasus Mountains
 * North Caucasus
 * Caspian Sea
 * Ural Mountains
 * West Siberian Plain
 * Siberia
 * Russian Far East
 * North Asia
 * Extreme points
 * Cities and towns
 * Islands
 * Lakes
 * Rivers
 * Volcanoes
 * Climate

Politics * Conscription
 * Constitution
 * Elections
 * Federal budget
 * Foreign relations
 * Freedom of assembly
 * Freedom of press * Media
   
   
 * Government
 * Human rights
 * Judiciary
 * Law * Citizenship
   
   
 * Civil Service
 * Law enforcement  (Prisons)
 * Liberalism
 * Military
 * Opposition
 * Political parties
 * President of Russia

Economy * Agriculture
 * Aircraft industry
 * Car industry
 * Banking
 * Central Bank
 * Corruption
 * Defence industry
 * Economic regions
 * Energy
 * Fishing industry
 * Forestry
 * Gambling
 * Mining
 * Petroleum industry
 * Russian ruble
 * Russian oligarchs
 * Space industry
 * Shipbuilding
 * Trade unions
 * Taxation
 * Tourism
 * Transport
 * Telecommunications
 * Waste

Society * Demographics
 * Citizens
 * Abortion
 * Alcoholism
 * Crime
 * Education
 * Healthcare
 * Ethnic groups
 * Languages
 * LGBT
 * Immigration * Illegal
   
   
 * Prostitution
 * Racism
 * Religion
 * Suicide
 * Water supply and sanitation
 * Women

Culture * Architecture
 * Art
 * Literature
 * Ballet
 * Cinema
 * Graffiti
 * Inventions
 * Media
 * Music
 * Public holidays
 * Opera
 * Language
 * Cuisine
 * Martial arts
 * Folklore
 * Television
 * Internet
 * National anthem
 * Coat of arms
 * National flag
 * Sports

 * Outline

 * Book
 * Category
 * Portal

Authority control * WorldCat Identities
 * VIAF: 123694235
 * LCCN: n80126312
 * ISNI: 0000 0001 2375 1518
 * GND: 4077548-3
 * SUDOC: 026402629
 * BNF: cb11865668d  (data)
 * NLA: 36332432
 * NDL: 00743732For other uses, see Official (disambiguation).Ambtenaar  (government official), by Louis DuséeAn official'  is someone who holds an office (function or mandate, regardless whether it carries an actual working space  with it)
in an organization  or government  and participates in the exercise of authority  (either their own or that of their superior
and/or employer, public or legally private).

A government official  or functionary  is an official who is involved in public administration  or government, through either 
election, appointment, selection, or employment. A bureaucrat  or civil servant  is a member of the bureaucracy. An elected
official  is a person who is an official by virtue of an election. Officials may also be appointed ex officio  (by virtue of
another office, often in a specified capacity, such as presiding, advisory, secretary). Some official positions may be inherited.
A person who currently holds an office is referred to as an incumbent.

The word official  as a noun  has been recorded since the Middle English  period, first seen in 1314.[citation needed]  It comes
from the Old French  official  (12th century), from the Latin  officialis  ("attendant to a magistrate, public official"), the
noun use of the original adjective  officialis  ("of or belonging to duty, service, or office") from officium  ("office"). The
meaning "person in charge of some public work or duty" was first recorded in 1555. The adjective is first attested in English in
1533 via the Old French oficial.

The informal term officialese, the jargon  of "officialdom", was first recorded in 1884.



ROMAN ANTIQUITY
An officialis  (plural officiales) was the official term (somewhat comparable to a modern civil servant) for any member of the 
officium  (staff) of a high dignitary such as a governor.

ECCLESIASTICAL JUDICIARY
Part of a series  on theHierarchy  of the
Catholic ChurchSaint PeterEcclesiastical titles * Pope
 * Cardinal * Cardinal-nephew
    * Cardinal protector
    * Crown-cardinal
    * Cardinal Vicar
   
   
 * Moderator of the curia
 * Chaplain of His Holiness
 * Papal legate
 * Papal majordomo
 * Apostolic Nuncio
 * Apostolic Delegate
 * Apostolic Syndic
 * Apostolic visitor
 * Vicar Apostolic
 * Apostolic Exarch
 * Apostolic Prefect
 * Assistant at the Pontifical Throne
 * Eparch
 * Metropolitan
 * Patriarch
 * Archbishop * Bishop
    * Bishop Emeritus
    * Diocesan bishop
    * Major archbishop
    * Primate
    * Suffragan bishop
    * Titular bishop
    * Coadjutor bishop
    * Auxiliary bishop
   
   
 * Territorial prelate
 * Territorial abbot

Liturgical titles * Acolyte
 * Consecrator
 * Lector
 * Reader
 * Subdeacon

Administrative and pastoral titles * Auditor
 * Brother
 * Chancellor
 * Chaplain * Military chaplain
    * Military ordinary
   
   
 * Coarb
 * Confessor
 * Consultor
 * Curate
 * Deacon
 * Defender of the Bond
 * Definitor
 * Diocesan administrator
 * Ecclesiastical judge
 * Episcopal vicar
 * Exorcist
 * Judicial vicar
 * Lay brother
 * Lay cardinal
 * Monsignor
 * Officialis
 * Pastor * Assistant pastor
   
   
 * Personal prelate
 * Preacher
 * Prefect
 * Presbyter
 * Priest
 * Protonotary Apostolic
 * Saint * Blessed
    * Venerable
   
   
 * Seminarian
 * Vicar forane
 * Vicar general

Consecrated and professed titles * Abbess
 * Abbot
 * Consecrated virgin
 * Corrector
 * Custos
 * Friar
 * Dean
 * Grand Master
 * Hermit
 * Master general
 * Master of novices
 * Monk
 * Novice
 * Nun * Postulant
   
   
 * Oblate
 * Prior
 * Provincial superior
 * Rector
 * Religious
 * Superior general

Additional titles * Almoner
 * Archimandrite
 * Archpriest
 * Archdeacon
 * Canon
 * Chorbishop
 * Commissary Apostolic
 * Datarius
 * Honorary Prelate
 * Minor canon
 * Notarius
 * Ostiarius
 * Peritus
 * Postulator
 * Precentor
 * Prince-bishop
 * Promotor Fidei
 * Protopriest
 * Protodeacon
 * Protosyncellus
 * Regionarius

Organization titles * Grand Master * Sovereign Military Order of Malta
    * Order of the Holy Sepulchre
    * Knights Templar
    * Order of Saint Lazarus
    * Teutonic Knights
    * Order of Santiago
    * Order of Calatrava
   
   

Catholicism portal * v
 * t
 * e

Part of a series  on theJurisprudence  of
Catholic canon law
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Current law * 1983 Code of Canon Law * Omnium in mentem
   
   
 * Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches
 * Ad tuendam fidem
 * Ex Corde Ecclesiae
 * Indulgentiarum Doctrina
 * Pastor Bonus * Pontificalis Domus
   
   
 * Universi Dominici gregis
 * Custom

Legal history * 1917 Code of Canon Law

Corpus Juris Canonici

 * Decretist
 * Regulæ Juris
 * Decretals of Gregory IX * Decretalist
   
   
 * Decretum Gratiani
 * Extravagantes
 * Liber Septimus

Ancient Church Orders

 * Didache
 * The Apostolic Constitutions * Canons of the Apostles
   
   

Collections of ancient canons

 * Collectiones canonum Dionysianae
 * Collectio canonum quadripartita
 * Collectio canonum Quesnelliana
 * Collectio canonum Wigorniensis

Other

 * Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals
 * Benedictus Deus (Pius IV)
 * Contractum trinius
 * Defect of Birth

Oriental law * Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches
 * Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII
 * Nomocanon
 * Archeparchy * Eparchy
   
   

Liturgical law * Ecclesia Dei
 * Mysterii Paschalis
 * Sacrosanctum Concilium * Musicam Sacram
   
   
 * Summorum Pontificum
 * Tra le sollecitudini

Sacramental law * Canon 844
 * Ex opere operato
 * Omnium in mentem
 * Valid but illicit

Holy Orders

 * Impediment (canon law) * Abstemius
   
   
 * Clerical celibacy (Catholic Church)
 * Nullity of Sacred Ordination
 * Dimissorial letters
 * Approbation

Confession

 * Apostolic Penitentiary
 * Complicit absolution
 * Canon penitentiary
 * Internal forum
 * Paenitentiale Theodori
 * Penitential canons
 * Seal of the Confessional

Eucharist

 * Eucharistic discipline
 * Canon 915

Matrimonial law * Affinity
 * Banns of Marriage
 * Declaration of Nullity * Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis
   
   
 * Defender of the Bond
 * Impediments to Marriage * Impediment of crime
    * Disparity of Cult
    * Ligamen
   
   
 * Matrimonial Dispensation * ratum sed non consummatum
   
   
 * Natural Marriage
 * Pauline privilege
 * Petrine privilege

Trials and tribunals * Tribunals * Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura
    * Tribunal of the Roman Rota
    * Apostolic Penitentiary
   
   

Tribunal Officers

 * Judicial Vicar/Officialis
 * Auditor
 * Advocatus Diaboli
 * Defender of the Bond

Tribunal Procedure

 * Appeal as from an abuse
 * Presumption

Canonical structuresParticular churches * Particular churches sui juris * Latin Church
    * Eastern Catholic Churches
   
   
 * Local particular churches * Abbacy nullius * Abbot nullius
      
      
    * Apostolic vicariate * Apostolic vicar
      
      
    * Apostolic administration * Apostolic administrator
      
      
    * Archdiocese
    * Diocese * Cathedraticum
      
      
    * Archeparchy
    * Eparchy
    * Deanery * Vicar forane
      
      
    * Military ordinariate
    * Mission sui juris
    * Personal ordinariate * Anglicanorum Coetibus
      
      
    * Personal Prelature
   
   

Juridic persons

 * Parish
 * Roman Curia * Dicastery
    * Congregation
    * Pontifical council
   
   

Jurisprudence * Canonical coronation * Canonically crowned images
   
   
 * Computation of time
 * Custom
 * Delegata potestas non potest delegari
 * Derogation
 * Dispensation * Taxa Innocentiana
   
   
 * Indult
 * Impediment
 * Interpretation * Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts
   
   
 * Jurisdiction
 * Peritus
 * Obreption & subreption
 * Obrogation
 * Promulgation
 * Resignation of the Roman Pontiff
 * Sede vacante
 * Vacatio legis
 * Valid but illicit

Philosophy, theology, and theory * Theology * Ecclesiology
   
   
 * Treatise on Law * Determinatio
   
   

Law of persons * Canonical age
 * Canonical faculties
 * Clerics and public office
 * Clerical celebacy
 * Consecrated life
 * Defect of Birth
 * Emancipation
 * Juridic & physical persons
 * Jus patronatus
 * Laicization (dispensation)

Canonical documents * Notary (canon law) * Protonotary apostolic
   
   
 * Apostolic constitution
 * Canon
 * Concordat
 * Decree
 * Decretal
 * Encyclical
 * Motu proprio
 * Ordinance
 * Papal brief
 * Papal bull
 * Penitential
 * Positive law
 * Rescript

Penal law * Canon 1324
 * Canon 1398
 * Excommunication
 * Interdict
 * Internal forum
 * Laicization (penal)
 * Latae Sententiae censure

Catholicism portal * v
 * t
 * e

In Canon law, the word or its Latin original officialis  is used absolutely as the legal title of a diocesan bishop's judicial
vicar  who shares the bishop's ordinary  judicial power over the diocese and presides over the diocesan ecclesiastical court.

The 1983 Code of Canon Law gives precedence to the title Judicial Vicar, rather than that of Officialis (canon 420). The Code of
Canons of the Eastern Churches uses only the title Judicial Vicar (canon 191).

In German, the related noun Offizialat  was also used for an official bureau in a diocese that did much of its administration,
comprising the vicariate-general, an adjoined secretariat, a registry office and a chancery.

The title of official principal, together with that of vicar-general, has in Anglicanism been merged in that of Diocesan
chancellor  of a diocese.

OTHER
In sports, the term official is used to describe a person enforcing playing rules  in the capacity of a linesman, referee  and 
umpire; also specified by the discipline, e.g. American football official, Ice hockey official.

The term officer  is close to being a synonym (but has more military connotations). A functionary  is someone who carries out a
particular role within an organization; this again is quite a close synonym for official, as a noun, but with connotations closer
to bureaucrat. Any such person acts in their official capacity, in carrying out the duties of their office; they are also said to 
officiate, for example in a ceremony. A public official  is an official of central or local government.

MAX WEBER ON BUREAUCRATIC OFFICIALS
Max Weber  gave as definition of a bureaucratic official:

 * he is personally free and appointed to his position on the basis of conduct
 * he exercises the authority delegated to him in accordance with impersonal rules, and his loyalty is enlisted on behalf of the
   faithful execution of his official duties
 * his appointment and job placement are dependent upon his technical qualifications
 * his administrative work is a full-time occupation
 * his work is rewarded by a regular salary and prospects of advancement in a lifetime career.

An official must exercise his judgment and his skills, but his duty is to place these at the service of a higher authority;
ultimately he is responsible only for the impartial execution of assigned tasks and must sacrifice his personal judgment if it
runs counter to his official duties.

ADJECTIVE
As an adjective, "official" often, but not always, means pertaining to the government, either as state employee or having state
recognition, or to analogous governance, or to formal (especially legally regulated) proceeding as opposed to informal business.
Some examples:

 * An official holiday  is a public holiday, having national (or regional) recognition.
 * An official language  is a language recognised by a government, for its own use in administration, or for delivering services
   to its citizens (for example, on signposts).
 * An official spokesperson  is an individual empowered to speak for the government, or some part of it such as a ministry, on a
   range of issues and on the record for the media.
 * An official statement  is an issued by an organisation as an expression of its corporate position or opinion;[citation needed] 
   an official apology  is an apology similarly issued by an organisation (as opposed to an apology by an individual).[citation
   needed]
 * Official policy  is policy publicly acknowledged and defended by an organisation.[citation needed]  In these cases unofficial 
   is an antonym, and variously may mean informal, unrecognised, personal or unacknowledged.
 * An official strike  is a strike  organised and recognised by a labour union, as opposed to an unofficial strike  at grassroots
   level.
 * An official school  is a school  administered by the government or by a local authority, as opposite to a private school  or 
   religious school.[citation needed]
 * An official history, for example of an institution or business, or particularly of a war  or military unit, is a history
   written as a commission, with the assumption of co-operation with access to records and archives; but without necessarily full 
   editorial independence.[citation needed]
 * An official biography  is usually on the same lines, written with access to private papers and the support of the family of the
   subject.[citation needed]

SEE ALSO
Look up official  in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. * Bureaucrat
 * Civil servant
 * Title
 * Pauly-Wissowa

SOURCES AND REFERENCES
(incomplete)

 *  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "article name
   needed". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton.
 *  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "article name needed". 
   Encyclopædia Britannica  (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
 * Etymology OnlineThis article is about humans as a species. For other uses, see Human (disambiguation). "Human race" redirects here. For the
concept of races of humans, see Race (human categorization).Human[1]
Temporal range: 0.195–0MaPreЄЄOSDCPTJKPgN↓Middle Pleistocene  – RecentAn adult  human male  (left) and female  (right) in Northern
 Thailand.Conservation status
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[2]Scientific classification  Kingdom:AnimaliaPhylum:ChordataClass:MammaliaOrder:PrimatesSuborder:
HaplorhiniFamily:HominidaeGenus:HomoSpecies:H. sapiensBinomial nameHomo sapiens
Linnaeus, 1758Subspecies†Homo sapiens idaltu  White et al., 2003
Homo sapiens sapiens

Homo sapiens  population densitySynonymsSpecies synonymy[1] * aethiopicus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * americanus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * arabicus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * aurignacensis
   Klaatsch & Hauser, 1910
 * australasicus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * cafer
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * capensis
   Broom, 1917
 * columbicus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * cro-magnonensis
   Gregory, 1921
 * drennani
   Kleinschmidt, 1931
 * eurafricanus
   (Sergi, 1911)
 * grimaldiensis
   Gregory, 1921
 * grimaldii
   Lapouge, 1906
 * hottentotus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * hyperboreus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * indicus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * japeticus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * melaninus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * monstrosus
   Linnaeus, 1758
 * neptunianus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * palestinus
   McCown & Keith, 1932
 * patagonus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * priscus
   Lapouge, 1899
 * proto-aethiopicus
   Giuffrida-Ruggeri, 1915
 * scythicus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * sinicus
   Bory de St. Vincent, 1825
 * spelaeus
   Lapouge, 1899
 * troglodytes
   Linnaeus, 1758
 * wadjakensis
   Dubois, 1921

Modern humans  (Homo sapiens, primarily ssp.  Homo sapiens sapiens) are the only extant members of Hominina  clade  (or human
clade), a branch  of the taxonomical tribe  Hominini  belonging to the family of great apes. They are characterized by erect
posture  and bipedal locomotion; manual dexterity  and increased tool  use, compared to other animals; and a general trend toward
larger, more complex brains  and societies.[3][4]

Early hominins—particularly the australopithecines, whose brains and anatomy are in many ways more similar to ancestral non-human
apes—are less often referred to as "human" than hominins of the genus Homo.[5]  Several of these hominins used fire, occupied
much
of Eurasia, and gave rise to anatomically modern Homo sapiens  in Africa  about 200,000 years ago.[6][7]  They began to exhibit
evidence of behavioral modernity  around 50,000 years ago. In several waves of migration, anatomically modern humans ventured out
of Africa  and populated most of the world.[8]

The spread of humans and their large and increasing population  has had a profound impact  on large areas of the environment and
millions of native species worldwide. Advantages that explain this evolutionary success include a relatively larger brain  with a
particularly well-developed neocortex, prefrontal cortex  and temporal lobes, which enable high levels of abstract reasoning, 
language, problem solving, sociality, and culture  through social learning. Humans use tools  to a much higher degree than any
other animal, are the only extant species known to build fires  and cook their food, and are the only extant species to clothe 
themselves and create and use numerous other technologies  and arts.

Humans are uniquely adept at utilizing systems of symbolic communication (such as language and art) for self-expression and the
exchange of ideas, and for organizing themselves into purposeful groups. Humans create complex social structures  composed of many
cooperating and competing groups, from families  and kinship  networks to political states. Social interactions  between humans
have established an extremely wide variety of values,[9]  social norms, and rituals, which together form the basis of human
society. Curiosity and the human desire to understand and influence the environment and to explain and manipulate phenomena (or
events) has provided the foundation for developing science, philosophy, mythology, religion, anthropology, and numerous other
fields of knowledge.

Though most of human existence has been sustained by hunting and gathering  in band societies,[10]  increasing numbers of human
societies began to practice sedentary  agriculture  approximately some 10,000 years ago,[11]  domesticating plants and animals,
thus allowing for the growth of civilization. These human societies subsequently expanded in size, establishing various forms of
government, religion, and culture around the world, unifying people within regions to form states  and empires. The rapid
advancement of scientific and medical understanding in the 19th and 20th centuries led to the development of fuel-driven
technologies and increased lifespans, causing the human population to rise exponentially. By February 2016, the global human 
population  had exceeded 7.3 billion.[12]



ETYMOLOGY AND DEFINITION
Human timelineview •discuss •edit-10 —–-9 —–-8 —–-7 —–-6 —–-5 —–-4 —–-3 —–-2 —–-1 —–0 —Human-like
apesNakalipithecusOuranopithecusSahelanthropusOrrorinArdipithecusAustralopithecusHomo habilisHomo erectusNeanderthalHomo sapiens←
Earlier apes←Earliest bipedal←Early bipedal←Earliest stone tools←Earliest exit
from Africa←Earliest fire use←Earliest cooking←Earliest clothes←Modern humans
P
l
e
i
s
t
o
c
e
n
e
P
l
i
o
c
e
n
e
M
i
o
c
e
n
e
H

o

m

i

n

i

d

sAxis scale: millions of years.
also see {{Life timeline}} and {{Nature timeline}}Life timelineview •discuss •edit-4500 —–-4000 —–-3500 —–-3000 —–-2500 —–-2000 —–
-1500 —–-1000 —–-500 —–0 —waterSingle-celled
lifephotosynthesisEukaryotesMulticellular
lifeLand lifeDinosaursMammalsFlowers←Earliest Earth (-4540)←Earliest water←Earliest life
(-4100)←LHB meteorites←Earliest oxygen←Atmospheric oxygen←Oxygen Crisis←Earliest sexual reproduction←Cambrian explosion←Earliest
humansP
h
a
n
r
z
c






P
r
o
t
e
r
o
z
o
i
c


A
r
c
h
e
a
nH
a
d
e
a
nAxis scale: millions of years.
also see {{Human timeline}} and {{Nature timeline}}Further information: Man (word)  and Names for the human speciesIn common
usage, the word "human" generally refers to the only extant species of the genus Homo — anatomically and behaviorally modern Homo
sapiens.

In scientific terms, the meanings of "hominid" and "hominin" have changed during the recent decades with advances in the discovery
and study of the fossil ancestors of modern humans. The previously clear boundary between humans and apes has blurred, resulting
in now acknowledging the hominids as encompassing multiple species, and Homo  and close relatives since the split from chimpanzees
as the only hominins. There is also a distinction between anatomically modern humans  and Archaic Homo sapiens, the earliest
fossil members of the species.

The English adjective human  is a Middle English  loanword  from Old French  humain, ultimately from Latin  hūmānus, the adjective
form of homō  "man." The word's use as a noun (with a plural: humans) dates to the 16th century.[13]  The native English term man 
can refer to the species generally (a synonym for humanity), and could formerly refer to specific individuals of either sex,
though this latter use is now obsolete.[14]

The species binomial  Homo sapiens  was coined by Carl Linnaeus  in his 18th century work Systema Naturae.[15]  The generic name  
Homo  is a learned 18th century derivation from Latin homō  "man," ultimately "earthly being" (Old Latin  hemō  a cognate  to Old
English guma  "man," from PIE  dʰǵʰemon-, meaning "earth" or "ground").[16]  The species-name sapiens  means "wise" or "sapient."
Note that the Latin word homo  refers to humans of either gender, and that sapiens  is the singular form (while there is no such
word as sapien).[17]

HISTORY
EVOLUTION AND RANGE
Main article: Human evolutionFurther information: Anthropology, Homo (genus), and Timeline of human evolutionThe genus Homo  evolved and diverged from other hominins  in Africa, after the human clade split from the chimpanzee  lineage of
the hominids  (great apes) branch of the primates. Modern humans, defined as the species Homo sapiens  or specifically to the
single extant subspecies  Homo sapiens sapiens, proceeded to colonize all the continents and larger islands, arriving in Eurasia 
125,000–60,000 years ago,[18][19]  Australia  around 40,000 years ago, the Americas  around 15,000 years ago, and remote islands
such as Hawaii, Easter Island, Madagascar, and New Zealand  between the years 300 and 1280.[20][21]

EVIDENCE FROM MOLECULAR BIOLOGY


The closest living relatives of humans are chimpanzees (genus Pan) and gorillas (genus Gorilla).[22]  With the sequencing  of both
the human and chimpanzee genome, current estimates of similarity between human and chimpanzee DNA sequences  range between 95% and
99%.[22][23][24]  By using the technique called a molecular clock  which estimates the time required for the number of divergent
mutations to accumulate between two lineages, the approximate date for the split between lineages can be calculated. The gibbons (

Hylobatidae) and orangutans  (genus Pongo) were the first groups to split from the line  leading to the humans, then gorillas 
(genus Gorilla) followed by the chimpanzees  (genus Pan). The splitting date between human and chimpanzee lineages is placed
around 4–8 million years ago during the late Miocene  epoch.[25][26]  During this split, chromosome 2  was formed from two other
chromosomes, leaving humans with only 23 pairs of chromosomes, compared to 24 for the other apes.[27][28]

EVIDENCE FROM THE FOSSIL RECORD
There is little fossil evidence for the divergence of the gorilla, chimpanzee and hominin lineages.[29][30]  The earliest fossils
that have been proposed as members of the hominin lineage are Sahelanthropus tchadensis  dating from 7  million years ago, 
Orrorin
tugenensis  dating from 5.7  million years ago, and Ardipithecus kadabba  dating to 5.6  million years ago. Each of these species
has been argued to be a bipedal  ancestor of later hominins, but all such claims are contested. It is also possible that any one
of the three is an ancestor of another branch of African apes, or is an ancestor shared between hominins and other African
Hominoidea (apes). The question of the relation between these early fossil species and the hominin lineage is still to be
resolved. From these early species the australopithecines  arose around 4  million years ago  diverged into robust  (also called 
Paranthropus) and gracile  branches, possibly one of which (such as A. garhi, dating to 2.5  million years ago) is a direct
ancestor of the genus Homo.[citation needed]

The earliest members of the genus Homo  are Homo habilis  which evolved around 2.8  million years ago.[31]  Homo habilis  has been
considered the first species for which there is clear evidence of the use of stone tools. More recently, however, in 2015, stone
tools, perhaps predating Homo habilis, have been discovered in northwestern Kenya  that have been dated to 3.3 million years old.
[32]  Nonetheless, the brains of Homo habilis  were about the same size as that of a chimpanzee, and their main adaptation was
bipedalism as an adaptation to terrestrial living. During the next million years a process of encephalization  began, and with the
arrival of Homo erectus  in the fossil record, cranial capacity had doubled. Homo erectus  were the first of the hominina to leave
Africa, and these species spread through Africa, Asia, and Europe between 1.3 to 1.8  million years ago. One population of H.
erectus, also sometimes classified as a separate species Homo ergaster, stayed in Africa and evolved into Homo sapiens. It is
believed that these species were the first to use fire and complex tools. The earliest transitional fossils between H.
ergaster/erectus  and archaic humans  are from Africa such as Homo rhodesiensis, but seemingly transitional forms are also found
at Dmanisi, Georgia. These descendants of African H. erectus  spread through Eurasia from ca. 500,000 years ago evolving into H.
antecessor, H. heidelbergensis  and H. neanderthalensis. The earliest fossils of anatomically modern humans  are from the Middle
Paleolithic, about 200,000 years ago such as the Omo remains  of Ethiopia and the fossils of Herto sometimes classified as Homo
sapiens idaltu.[33]  Later fossils of archaic Homo sapiens  from Skhul  in Israel and Southern Europe begin around 90,000 years
ago.[34]

ANATOMICAL ADAPTATIONS
Reconstruction of Australopithecus afarensis.Reconstruction of Homo habilis, the earliest known species of the genus Homo  and the
first human ancestor to use stone toolsReconstruction of Homo erectusReconstruction of an adult female Homo erectus.Human
evolution is characterized by a number of morphological, developmental, physiological, and behavioral  changes that have taken
place since the split between the last common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees. The most significant of these adaptations are 1.
bipedalism, 2. increased brain size, 3. lengthened ontogeny  (gestation and infancy), 4. decreased sexual dimorphism  (neoteny).
The relationship between all these changes is the subject of ongoing debate.[35]  Other significant morphological changes included
the evolution of a power and precision grip, a change first occurring in H. erectus.[36]

Bipedalism  is the basic adaption of the hominin line, and it is considered the main cause behind a suite of skeletal changes 
shared by all bipedal hominins. The earliest bipedal hominin  is considered to be either Sahelanthropus[37]  or Orrorin, with 
Ardipithecus, a full bipedal, coming somewhat later.[citation needed]  The knuckle walkers, the gorilla  and chimpanzee, diverged
around the same time, and either Sahelanthropus  or Orrorin  may be humans' last shared ancestor with those animals.[citation
needed]  The early bipedals eventually evolved into the australopithecines  and later the genus Homo.[citation needed]  There are
several theories of the adaptational value of bipedalism. It is possible that bipedalism was favored because it freed up the hands
for reaching and carrying food, because it saved energy during locomotion, because it enabled long distance running and hunting,
or as a strategy for avoiding hyperthermia by reducing the surface exposed to direct sun.[citation needed]

The human species developed a much larger brain than that of other primates – typically 1,330 cm3  in modern humans, over twice
the size of that of a chimpanzee or gorilla.[38]  The pattern of encephalization  started with Homo habilis  which at
approximately 600 cm3  had a brain slightly larger than chimpanzees, and continued with Homo erectus  (800–1100 cm3), and reached
a maximum in Neanderthals with an average size of 1200–1900 cm3, larger even than Homo sapiens  (but less encephalized).[39]  The
pattern of human postnatal brain growth  differs from that of other apes (heterochrony), and allows for extended periods of 
social
learning  and language acquisition  in juvenile humans. However, the differences between the structure of human brains  and those
of other apes may be even more significant than differences in size.[40][41][42][43]  The increase in volume over time has
affected different areas within the brain unequally – the temporal lobes, which contain centers for language processing have
increased disproportionately, as has the prefrontal cortex  which has been related to complex decision making and moderating
social behavior.[38]  Encephalization has been tied to an increasing emphasis on meat in the diet,[44][45]  or with the
development of cooking,[46]  and it has been proposed [47]  that intelligence increased as a response to an increased necessity
for solving social problems  as human society became more complex.

The reduced degree of sexual dimorphism is primarily visible in the reduction of the male canine tooth  relative to other ape
species (except gibbons). Another important physiological change related to sexuality in humans was the evolution of hidden estrus
. Humans are the only ape in which the female is fertile year round, and in which no special signals of fertility are produced by
the body (such as genital swelling  during estrus). Nonetheless humans retain a degree of sexual dimorphism in the distribution of
body hair and subcutaneous fat, and in the overall size, males being around 25% larger than females. These changes taken together
have been interpreted as a result of an increased emphasis on pair bonding  as a possible solution to the requirement for
increased parental investment due to the prolonged infancy of offspring.[citation needed]

RISE OF HOMO SAPIENS
Further information: Recent African origin of modern humans, Multiregional origin of modern humans, Anatomically modern humans, 
Archaic human admixture with modern humans, and Early human migrations
World map of early human migrations according to mitochondrial  population genetics  (numbers are millennia  before present, the
North Pole is at the center).By the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic  period (50,000 BP), full behavioral modernity, including language, music  and other 
cultural universals  had developed.[48][49]  As modern humans spread out from Africa they encountered other hominids such as Homo
neanderthalensis  and the so-called Denisovans. The nature of interaction between early humans and these sister species has been a
long-standing source of controversy, the question being whether humans replaced these earlier species or whether they were in fact
similar enough to interbreed, in which case these earlier populations may have contributed genetic material to modern humans.[50] 
Recent studies of the human and Neanderthal genomes suggest gene flow  between archaic Homo sapiens  and Neanderthals and
Denisovans.[51][52][53]  In March 2016, studies were published that suggest that modern humans bred with hominins, including
Denisovans and Neanderthals, on multiple occasions.[54]

This dispersal out of Africa  is estimated to have begun about 70,000 years BP from Northeast Africa. Current evidence suggests
that there was only one such dispersal and that it only involved a few hundred individuals. The vast majority of humans stayed in
Africa and adapted to a diverse array of environments.[55]  Modern humans subsequently spread globally, replacing earlier hominins
(either through competition or hybridization). They inhabited Eurasia  and Oceania  by 40,000 years BP, and the Americas  at least
14,500 years BP.[56][57]

TRANSITION TO CIVILIZATION
Main articles: Neolithic Revolution  and Cradle of civilizationFurther information: History of the world
The rise of agriculture, and domestication  of animals, led to stable human settlements.Until about 10,000 years ago, humans lived
as hunter-gatherers. They gradually gained domination over much of the natural environment. They generally lived in small nomadic
groups known as band societies, often in caves. The advent of agriculture  prompted the Neolithic Revolution, when access to food
surplus led to the formation of permanent human settlements, the domestication  of animals and the use of metal tools  for the
first time in history. Agriculture encouraged trade  and cooperation, and led to complex society.[citation needed]

The early civilizations of Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, China, Maya, Greece  and Rome  were some of the cradles of civilization.[58]

[59][60]  The Late Middle Ages  and the Early Modern Period  saw the rise of revolutionary ideas and technologies. Over the next
500 years, exploration  and European colonialism  brought great parts of the world under European control, leading to later
struggles for independence. The concept of the modern world as distinct from an ancient world is based on a rapid change progress
in a brief period of time in many areas.[citation needed]  Advances in all areas of human activity prompted new theories such as 
evolution  and psychoanalysis, which changed humanity's views of itself.[citation needed]  The Scientific Revolution, 
Technological Revolution  and the Industrial Revolution  up until the 19th century resulted in independent discoveries such as 
imaging technology, major innovations in transport, such as the airplane and automobile; energy development, such as coal and
electricity.[61]  This correlates with population growth  (especially in America)[62]  and higher life expectancy, the World
population  rapidly increased numerous times in the 19th and 20th centuries as nearly 10% of the 100 billion people lived in the
past century.[63]

With the advent of the Information Age  at the end of the 20th century, modern humans live in a world that has become increasingly
 globalized  and interconnected. As of 2010, almost 2 billion humans are able to communicate with each other via the Internet,[64] 
 and 3.3 billion by mobile phone  subscriptions.[65]  Although interconnection between humans has encouraged the growth of science
, art, discussion, and technology, it has also led to culture clashes  and the development and use of weapons of mass destruction.
[citation needed]  Human civilization has led to environmental destruction  and pollution  significantly contributing to the
ongoing mass extinction  of other forms of life called the Holocene extinction event,[66]  which may be further accelerated by 
global warming  in the future.[67]

HABITAT AND POPULATION
Further information: Human migration, Demography, and World population
The Earth, as seen from space  in October 2000, showing the extent of human occupation of the planet. The bright lights signify
both the most densely inhabited areas and ones financially capable of illuminating those areas.Early human settlements were
dependent on proximity to water  and, depending on the lifestyle, other natural resources  used for subsistence, such as
populations of animal prey for hunting  and arable land  for growing crops and grazing livestock. But humans have a great capacity
for altering their habitats  by means of technology, through irrigation, urban planning, construction, transport, manufacturing 
goods, deforestation  and desertification. Deliberate habitat alteration is often done with the goals of increasing material 
wealth, increasing thermal comfort, improving the amount of food available, improving aesthetics, or improving ease of access to
resources or other human settlements. With the advent of large-scale trade and transport infrastructure, proximity to these
resources has become unnecessary, and in many places, these factors are no longer a driving force behind the growth and decline of
a population. Nonetheless, the manner in which a habitat is altered is often a major determinant in population change.[citation
needed]

Technology has allowed humans to colonize all of the continents and adapt to virtually all climates. Within the last century,
humans have explored Antarctica, the ocean depths, and outer space, although large-scale colonization of these environments is not
yet feasible. With a population of over seven billion, humans are among the most numerous of the large mammals. Most humans (61%)
live in Asia. The remainder live in the Americas  (14%), Africa  (14%), Europe  (11%), and Oceania  (0.5%).[68]

Human habitation within closed ecological systems  in hostile environments, such as Antarctica and outer space, is expensive,
typically limited in duration, and restricted to scientific, military, or industrial expeditions. Life in space has been very
sporadic, with no more than thirteen humans in space at any given time.[69]  Between 1969 and 1972, two humans at a time spent
brief intervals on the Moon. As of November 2016, no other celestial body has been visited by humans, although there has been a
continuous human presence in space since the launch of the initial crew to inhabit the International Space Station  on October 31,
2000.[70]  However, other celestial bodies have been visited by human-made objects.[71][72][73]

Since 1800, the human population  has increased from one billion[74]  to over seven billion,[75]  In 2004, some 2.5 billion out of
6.3 billion people (39.7%) lived in urban areas. In February 2008, the U.N. estimated that half the world's population would live
in urban areas  by the end of the year.[76]  Problems for humans living in cities  include various forms of pollution and crime,
[77]  especially in inner city and suburban slums. Both overall population numbers and the proportion residing in cities are
expected to increase significantly in the coming decades.[78]

Humans have had a dramatic effect on the environment. Humans are apex predators, being rarely preyed upon by other species.[79] 
Currently, through land development, combustion of fossil fuels, and pollution, humans are thought to be the main contributor to
global climate change.[80]  If this continues at its current rate it is predicted that climate change will wipe out half of all
plant and animal species over the next century.[81][82]

See also: City, Town, Nomad, Camping, Farm, House, Watercraft, Infrastructure, Architecture, Building, and EngineeringBIOLOGY
Basic anatomical features of female  and male  humans. These models have had body hair  and male facial hair  removed and head
hair trimmed. The female model is wearing red nail polish  on her toenails  and a ring.Vitruvian Man, Leonardo da Vinci's image is
often used as an implied symbol of the essential symmetry of the human body, and by extension, of the universe as a whole.ANATOMY
AND PHYSIOLOGY
Main article: Human bodyFurther information: Human physical appearance, Anatomically modern human, and Sex differences in humans
Most aspects of human physiology are closely homologous  to corresponding aspects of animal  physiology. The human body consists
of the legs, the torso, the arms, the neck, and the head. An adult  human body  consists of about 100 trillion (1014) cells. The
most commonly defined body systems  in humans are the nervous, the cardiovascular, the circulatory, the digestive, the endocrine,
the immune, the integumentary, the lymphatic, the muscoskeletal, the reproductive, the respiratory, and the urinary system.[83]
[84]

Humans, like most of the other apes, lack external tails, have several blood type  systems, have opposable thumbs, and are 
sexually dimorphic. The comparatively minor anatomical differences between humans and chimpanzees  are a result of human 
bipedalism. One difference is that humans have a far faster and more accurate throw  than other animals. Humans are also among the
best long-distance runners in the animal kingdom, but slower over short distances.[85][86]  Humans' thinner body hair and more
productive sweat glands  help avoid heat exhaustion  while running for long distances.[87]

As a consequence of bipedalism, human females have narrower birth canals. The construction of the human pelvis  differs from other
 primates, as do the toes. A trade-off for these advantages of the modern human pelvis is that childbirth  is more difficult and
dangerous than in most mammals, especially given the larger head size of human babies  compared to other primates. This means that
human babies must turn around as they pass through the birth canal, which other primates do not do, and it makes humans the only
species where females require help from their conspecifics[clarification needed]  to reduce the risks of birthing. As a partial 
evolutionary  solution, human fetuses are born less developed and more vulnerable. Chimpanzee babies are cognitively more
developed than human babies until the age of six months, when the rapid development of human brains surpasses chimpanzees. Another
difference between women and chimpanzee females is that women go through the menopause  and become unfertile  decades before the
end of their lives. All species of non-human apes are capable of giving birth until death. Menopause probably developed as it has
provided an evolutionary advantage (more caring time) to young relatives.[86]

Apart from bipedalism, humans differ from chimpanzees mostly in smelling, hearing, digesting  proteins, brain size, and the
ability of language. Humans' brains  are about three times bigger than in chimpanzees. More importantly, the brain to body ratio
is much higher in humans than in chimpanzees, and humans have a significantly more developed cerebral cortex, with a larger number
of neurons. The mental abilities of humans are remarkable compared to other apes. Humans' ability of speech  is unique among
primates. Humans are able to create new and complex ideas, and to develop technology, which is unprecedented among other organisms 
 on Earth.[86]

It is estimated that the worldwide average height for an adult human  male is about 172 cm (5 ft 71⁄2 in),[citation needed]  while
the worldwide average height for adult human females is about 158 cm (5 ft 2 in).[citation needed]  Shrinkage of stature may begin
in middle age in some individuals, but tends to be typical in the extremely aged.[88]  Through history human populations have
universally become taller, probably as a consequence of better nutrition, healthcare, and living conditions.[89]  The average mass 
 of an adult human is 54–64 kg (120–140 lb) for females and 76–83 kg (168–183 lb) for males.[90]  Like many other conditions, body
weight and body type is influenced by both genetic susceptibility and environment and varies greatly among individuals. (see 
obesity)[91][92]

Although humans appear hairless compared to other primates, with notable hair  growth occurring chiefly on the top of the head, 
underarms  and pubic area, the average human has more hair follicles  on his or her body than the average chimpanzee. The main
distinction is that human hairs are shorter, finer, and less heavily pigmented than the average chimpanzee's, thus making them
harder to see.[93]  Humans have about 2 million sweat glands  spread over their entire bodies, many more than chimpanzees, whose
sweat glands are scarce and are mainly located on the palm of the hand and on the soles of the feet.[94]

The dental formula  of humans is: 2.1.2.32.1.2.3. Humans have proportionately shorter palates  and much smaller teeth  than other
primates. They are the only primates to have short, relatively flush canine teeth. Humans have characteristically crowded teeth,
with gaps from lost teeth usually closing up quickly in young individuals. Humans are gradually losing their wisdom teeth, with
some individuals having them congenitally absent.[95]

GENETICS
Main article: Human geneticsFurther information: Human evolutionary genetics
A graphical representation of the ideal human karyotype, including both the male and female variant of the sex chromosome (number
23).Like all mammals, humans are a diploid  eukaryotic  species. Each somatic  cell  has two sets of 23 chromosomes, each set received
from one parent; gametes  have only one set of chromosomes, which is a mixture of the two parental sets. Among the 23 pairs of
chromosomes there are 22 pairs of autosomes  and one pair of sex chromosomes. Like other mammals, humans have an XY
sex-determination system, so that females  have the sex chromosomes XX and males  have XY.[96]

One human genome  was sequenced in full in 2003, and currently efforts are being made to achieve a sample of the genetic diversity
of the species (see International HapMap Project). By present estimates, humans have approximately 22,000 genes.[97]  The
variation in human DNA is very small compared to other species, possibly suggesting a population bottleneck  during the Late
Pleistocene  (around 100,000 years ago), in which the human population was reduced to a small number of breeding pairs.[98][99]  
Nucleotide diversity  is based on single mutations called single nucleotide polymorphisms  (SNPs). The nucleotide diversity
between humans is about 0.1%, i.e. 1 difference per 1,000 base pairs.[100][101]  A difference of 1 in 1,000 nucleotides  between
two humans chosen at random amounts to about 3 million nucleotide differences, since the human genome has about 3 billion
nucleotides. Most of these single nucleotide polymorphisms  (SNPs) are neutral  but some (about 3 to 5%) are functional and
influence phenotypic  differences between humans through alleles.[citation needed]

By comparing the parts of the genome that are not under natural selection and which therefore accumulate mutations at a fairly
steady rate, it is possible to reconstruct a genetic tree incorporating the entire human species since the last shared ancestor.
Each time a certain mutation (SNP) appears in an individual and is passed on to his or her descendants, a haplogroup  is formed
including all of the descendants of the individual who will also carry that mutation. By comparing mitochondrial DNA, which is
inherited only from the mother, geneticists have concluded that the last female common ancestor whose genetic marker is found in
all modern humans, the so-called mitochondrial Eve, must have lived around 90,000 to 200,000 years ago.[102][103][104]

Human accelerated regions, first described in August 2006,[105][106]  are a set of 49 segments of the human genome  that are
conserved throughout vertebrate  evolution but are strikingly different in humans. They are named according to their degree of
difference between humans and their nearest animal relative (chimpanzees) (HAR1 showing the largest degree of human-chimpanzee
differences). Found by scanning through genomic databases of multiple species, some of these highly mutated  areas may contribute
to human-specific traits.[citation needed]

The forces of natural selection  have continued to operate on human populations, with evidence that certain regions of the genome 
display directional selection  in the past 15,000 years.[107]

LIFE CYCLE
See also: Childbirth  and Life expectancy
A 10 mm human embryo  at 5 weeksBoy  and girl  before pubertyYouth  male and femaleAdult  man  and womanElderly  man and womanAs
with other mammals, human reproduction  takes place as internal fertilization  by sexual intercourse. During this process, the
male inserts his erect penis  into the female's vagina  and ejaculates  semen, which contains sperm. The sperm travels through the
vagina and cervix into the uterus or Fallopian tubes for fertilization  of the ovum. Upon fertilization and implantation,
gestation then occurs within the female's uterus.

The zygote  divides inside the female's uterus to become an embryo, which over a period of 38 weeks (9 months) of gestation 
becomes a fetus. After this span of time, the fully grown fetus is birthed  from the woman's body and breathes independently as an
infant for the first time. At this point, most modern cultures recognize the baby as a person entitled to the full protection of
the law, though some jurisdictions extend various levels of personhood  earlier to human fetuses while they remain in the uterus.

Compared with other species, human childbirth is dangerous. Painful labors lasting 24 hours or more are not uncommon and sometimes
lead to the death of the mother, the child or both.[108]  This is because of both the relatively large fetal head circumference
and the mother's relatively narrow pelvis.[109][110]  The chances of a successful labor increased significantly during the 20th
century in wealthier countries with the advent of new medical technologies. In contrast, pregnancy and natural childbirth  remain
hazardous ordeals in developing regions of the world, with maternal death rates  approximately 100 times greater than in developed
countries.[111]

In developed countries, infants are typically 3–4 kg (6–9 pounds) in weight and 50–60 cm (20–24 inches) in height at birth.[112][
not in citation given]  However, low birth weight  is common in developing countries, and contributes to the high levels of 
infant
mortality  in these regions.[113]  Helpless at birth, humans continue to grow for some years, typically reaching sexual maturity 
at 12 to 15 years of age. Females continue to develop physically until around the age of 18, whereas male development continues
until around age 21. The human life span  can be split into a number of stages: infancy, childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, 
adulthood  and old age. The lengths of these stages, however, have varied across cultures and time periods. Compared to other
primates, humans experience an unusually rapid growth spurt during adolescence, where the body grows 25% in size. Chimpanzees, for
example, grow only 14%, with no pronounced spurt.[114]  The presence of the growth spurt is probably necessary to keep children
physically small until they are psychologically mature. Humans are one of the few species in which females undergo menopause. It
has been proposed that menopause increases a woman's overall reproductive success by allowing her to invest more time and
resources in her existing offspring, and in turn their children (the grandmother hypothesis), rather than by continuing to bear
children into old age.[115][116]

For various reasons, including biological/genetic causes,[117]  women live on average about four years longer than men—as of 2013
the global average life expectancy at birth  of a girl is estimated at 70.2 years compared to 66.1 for a boy.[118]  There are
significant geographical variations in human life expectancy, mostly correlated with economic development—for example life
expectancy at birth in Hong Kong  is 84.8 years for girls and 78.9 for boys, while in Swaziland, primarily because of AIDS, it is
31.3 years for both sexes.[119]  The developed world is generally aging, with the median age around 40 years. In the developing
world  the median age is between 15 and 20 years. While one in five Europeans is 60 years of age or older, only one in twenty
Africans is 60 years of age or older.[120]  The number of centenarians  (humans of age 100 years or older) in the world was
estimated by the United Nations  at 210,000 in 2002.[121]  At least one person, Jeanne Calment, is known to have reached the age
of 122 years;[122]  higher ages have been claimed but they are not well substantiated.

DIET
Main article: Human nutrition
Humans living in Bali, Indonesia  preparing a meal.Venus of Willendorf  statuette from the Upper Palaeolithic  periodTwo starved
boys during the Russian famine of 1921–22Humans are omnivorous, capable of consuming a wide variety of plant and animal material.[123][124]  Varying with available food
sources in regions of habitation, and also varying with cultural and religious norms, human groups have adopted a range of diets,
from purely vegetarian  to primarily carnivorous. In some cases, dietary restrictions in humans can lead to deficiency diseases;
however, stable human groups have adapted to many dietary patterns through both genetic specialization and cultural conventions to
use nutritionally balanced food sources.[125]  The human diet is prominently reflected in human culture, and has led to the
development of food science.

Until the development of agriculture approximately 10,000 years ago, Homo sapiens  employed a hunter-gatherer method as their sole
means of food collection. This involved combining stationary food sources (such as fruits, grains, tubers, and mushrooms, insect
larvae and aquatic mollusks) with wild game, which must be hunted and killed in order to be consumed.[126]  It has been proposed
that humans have used fire to prepare and cook  food since the time of Homo erectus.[127]  Around ten thousand years ago, humans
developed agriculture,[128]  which substantially altered their diet. This change in diet may also have altered human biology; with
the spread of dairy farming  providing a new and rich source of food, leading to the evolution of the ability to digest lactose 
in some adults.[129][130]  Agriculture led to increased populations, the development of cities, and because of increased
population density, the wider spread of infectious diseases. The types of food consumed, and the way in which they are prepared,
have varied widely by time, location, and culture.

In general, humans can survive for two to eight weeks without food, depending on stored body fat. Survival without water is
usually limited to three or four days. About 36 million humans die every year from causes directly or indirectly related to
starvation.[131]  Childhood malnutrition is also common and contributes to the global burden of disease.[132]  However global food
distribution is not even, and obesity  among some human populations has increased rapidly, leading to health complications and
increased mortality in some developed, and a few developing countries. Worldwide over one billion people are obese,[133]  while in
the United States 35% of people are obese, leading to this being described as an "obesity epidemic."[134]  Obesity is caused by
consuming more calories  than are expended, so excessive weight gain is usually caused by an energy-dense diet.[133]

BIOLOGICAL VARIATION
Main article: Human genetic variation
People in hot climates are often slender and dark skinned, such as these Maasai  men from Kenya.
People in cold climates tend to be lighter skinned such as these Inuit  women from Canada.No two humans—not even monozygotic twins—are genetically identical. Genes  and environment  influence human biological variation
from visible characteristics to physiology to disease susceptibly to mental abilities. The exact influence of genes and
environment  on certain traits is not well understood.[135][136]

Most current genetic  and archaeological  evidence supports a recent single origin of modern humans  in East Africa,[137]  with
first migrations placed at 60,000 years ago. Compared to the great apes, human gene sequences—even among African  populations—are 
remarkably homogeneous.[138]  On average, genetic similarity between any two humans is 99.9%.[139][140]  There is about 2–3 times
more genetic diversity within the wild chimpanzee population, than in the entire human gene pool.[141][142][143]

The human body's ability to adapt  to different environmental stresses is remarkable, allowing humans to acclimatize to a wide
variety of temperatures, humidity, and altitudes. As a result, humans are a cosmopolitan species found in almost all regions of
the world, including tropical rainforests, arid desert, extremely cold arctic regions, and heavily polluted cities. Most other
species are confined to a few geographical areas by their limited adaptability.[144]

There is biological variation in the human species—with traits such as blood type, cranial features, eye color, hair color  and
type, height  and build, and skin color  varying across the globe. Human body types vary substantially. The typical height of an
adult human is between 1.4 m and 1.9 m (4 ft 7 in and 6 ft 3 in), although this varies significantly depending, among other
things, on sex  and ethnic origin.[145][146]  Body size is partly determined by genes and is also significantly influenced by
environmental factors such as diet, exercise, and sleep patterns, especially as an influence in childhood. Adult height for each
sex in a particular ethnic group approximately follows a normal distribution. Those aspects of genetic variation that give clues
to human evolutionary history, or are relevant to medical research, have received particular attention. For example, the genes
that allow adult humans to digest lactose  are present in high frequencies in populations that have long histories of cattle
domestication, suggesting natural selection having favored that gene in populations that depend on cow milk. Some hereditary
diseases such as sickle cell anemia  are frequent in populations where malaria  has been endemic throughout history—it is believed
that the same gene gives increased resistance to malaria among those who are unaffected carriers of the gene. Similarly,
populations that have for a long time inhabited specific climates, such as arctic or tropical regions or high altitudes, tend to
have developed specific phenotypes that are beneficial for conserving energy in those environments—short stature and stocky build
in cold regions, tall and lanky in hot regions, and with high lung capacities at high altitudes. Similarly, skin color varies 
clinally  with darker skin around the equator—where the added protection from the sun's ultraviolet radiation is thought to give
an evolutionary advantage—and lighter skin tones closer to the poles.[147][148][149][150]

The hue of human skin and hair is determined by the presence of pigments  called melanins. Human skin color can range from 
darkest
brown  to lightest peach, or even nearly white or colorless in cases of albinism.[143]  Human hair ranges in color from white  to 
red  to blond  to brown  to black, which is most frequent.[151]  Hair color depends on the amount of melanin (an effective sun
blocking pigment) in the skin  and hair, with hair melanin concentrations in hair fading with increased age, leading to grey  or
even white hair. Most researchers believe that skin darkening is an adaptation that evolved as protection against ultraviolet
solar radiation, which also helps balancing folate, which is destroyed by ultraviolet radiation. Light skin pigmentation protects
against depletion of vitamin D, which requires sunlight  to make.[152]  Skin pigmentation of contemporary humans is clinally
distributed across the planet, and in general correlates with the level of ultraviolet radiation in a particular geographic area.
Human skin also has a capacity to darken (tan) in response to exposure to ultraviolet radiation.[153][154][155]

STRUCTURE OF VARIATION
A Libyan, a Nubian, a Syrian, and an Egyptian, drawing by an unknown artist after a mural of the tomb of Seti I.
The ancestors of Native Americans, such as this Yanomami  woman, crossed into the Americas from Northeast Asia, and genetic and
linguistic evidence links them to North Asian populations, particularly those of East Siberia.[156]
An older adult human male European in Paris – playing chess at the Jardins du Luxembourg.Within the human species, the greatest
degree of genetic variation exists between males and females. While the nucleotide  genetic variation of individuals of the same
sex across global populations is no greater than 0.1%, the genetic difference between males  and females  is between 1% and 2%.
Although different in nature[clarification needed], this approaches the genetic differentiation between men and male chimpanzees
or women and female chimpanzees. The genetic difference between sexes contributes to anatomical, hormonal, neural, and
physiological differences between men and women, although the exact degree and nature of social and environmental influences on
sexes are not completely understood. Males on average are 15% heavier and 15 cm taller than females. There is a difference between
body types, body organs and systems, hormonal levels, sensory systems, and muscle mass between sexes. On average, there is a
difference of about 40–50% in upper body strength and 20–30% in lower body strength between men and women. Women generally have a
higher body fat  percentage than men. Women have lighter skin  than men of the same population; this has been explained by a
higher need for vitamin D (which is synthesized by sunlight) in females during pregnancy  and lactation. As there are chromosomal
differences between females and males, some X and Y chromosome related conditions and disorders  only affect either men or women.
Other conditional differences between males and females are not related to sex chromosomes. Even after allowing for body weight
and volume, the male voice  is usually an octave  deeper than the female voice. Women have a longer life span  in almost every
population around the world.[157][158][159][160][161][162][163][164][165]

Males typically have larger tracheae  and branching bronchi, with about 30% greater lung volume  per unit body mass. They have
larger hearts, 10% higher red blood cell  count, and higher hemoglobin, hence greater oxygen-carrying capacity. They also have
higher circulating clotting factors  (vitamin K, prothrombin  and platelets). These differences lead to faster healing of wounds 
and higher peripheral pain tolerance.[166]  Females typically have more white blood cells  (stored and circulating), more 
granulocytes  and B and T lymphocytes. Additionally, they produce more antibodies  at a faster rate than males. Hence they develop
fewer infectious  diseases and these continue for shorter periods.[166]  Ethologists  argue that females, interacting with other
females and multiple offspring in social groups, have experienced such traits as a selective  advantage.[167][168][169][170][171] 
According to Daly and Wilson, "The sexes differ more in human beings than in monogamous  mammals, but much less than in extremely 
polygamous  mammals."[172]  But given that sexual dimorphism  in the closest relatives of humans is much greater than among
humans, the human clade must be considered to be characterized by decreasing sexual dimorphism, probably due to less competitive
mating patterns. One proposed explanation is that human sexuality has developed more in common with its close relative the bonobo,
which exhibits similar sexual dimorphism, is polygynandrous  and uses recreational sex  to reinforce social bonds and reduce
aggression.[173]

Humans of the same sex are 99.9% genetically identical. There is extremely little variation between human geographical
populations, and most of the variation that does occur is at the personal level within local areas, and not between populations.
[143][174][175]  Of the 0.1% of human genetic differentiation, 85% exists within any randomly chosen local population, be they
Italians, Koreans, or Kurds. Two randomly chosen Koreans may be genetically as different as a Korean and an Italian. Any ethnic
group contains 85% of the human genetic diversity of the world. Genetic data shows that no matter how population groups are
defined, two people from the same population group are about as different from each other as two people from any two different
population groups.[143][176][177][178]

Current genetic research has demonstrated that humans on the African continent  are the most genetically diverse.[179]  There is
more human genetic diversity in Africa than anywhere else on Earth. The genetic structure of Africans was traced to 14 ancestral
population clusters. Human genetic diversity decreases in native populations with migratory distance from Africa and this is
thought to be the result of bottlenecks  during human migration.[180][181]  Humans have lived in Africa for the longest time,
which has allowed accumulation of a higher diversity of genetic mutations in these populations. Only part of Africa's population
migrated out of the continent, bringing just part of the original African genetic variety with them. African populations harbor
genetic alleles that are not found in other places of the world. All the common alleles found in populations outside of Africa are
found on the African continent.[143]

Geographical distribution of human variation is complex and constantly shifts through time which reflects complicated human
evolutionary history. Most human biological variation is clinally  distributed and blends gradually from one area to the next.
Groups of people around the world have different frequencies of polymorphic  genes. Furthermore, different traits are
non-concordant and each have different clinal distribution. Adaptability varies both from person to person and from population to
population. The most efficient adaptive responses are found in geographical populations where the environmental stimuli are the
strongest (e.g. Tibetans  are highly adapted to high altitudes). The clinal geographic genetic variation is further complicated by
the migration and mixing between human populations which has been occurring since prehistoric times.[143][182][183][184][185][186]

Human variation is highly non-concordant: most of the genes do not cluster together and are not inherited together. Skin and hair
color are not correlated to height, weight, or athletic ability. Human species do not share the same patterns of variation through
geography. Skin color varies with latitude and certain people are tall or have brown hair. There is a statistical correlation
between particular features in a population, but different features are not expressed or inherited together. Thus, genes which
code for superficial physical traits—such as skin color, hair color, or height—represent a minuscule and insignificant portion of
the human genome and do not correlate with genetic affinity. Dark-skinned populations that are found in Africa, Australia, and
South Asia are not closely related to each other.[155][185][186][187][188][189]  Even within the same region, physical phenotype
is not related to genetic affinity: dark-skinned Ethiopians  are more closely related to light-skinned Armenians  than to
dark-skinned Bantu  populations.[190]  Despite pygmy  populations of South East Asia  (Andamanese) having similar physical
features with African pygmy populations such as short stature, dark skin, and curly hair, they are not genetically closely related
to these populations.[191]  Genetic variants affecting superficial anatomical features (such as skin color)—from a genetic
perspective, are essentially meaningless—they involve a few hundred of the billions of nucleotides in a person's DNA.[192] 
Individuals with the same morphology do not necessarily cluster with each other by lineage, and a given lineage does not include
only individuals with the same trait complex.[143][177][193]

Due to practices of group endogamy, allele frequencies cluster locally around kin groups and lineages, or by national, ethnic,
cultural and linguistic boundaries, giving a detailed degree of correlation between genetic clusters and population groups when
considering many alleles simultaneously. Despite this, there are no genetic boundaries around local populations that biologically
mark off any discrete groups  of humans. Human variation is continuous, with no clear points of demarcation. There are no large
clusters of relatively homogeneous people and almost every individual has genetic alleles from several ancestral groups.[143][184]

[185][193][194][195][196][197][198][199][200][201]

PSYCHOLOGY
Main article: PsychologyFurther information: Human brain  and Mind
Drawing of the human brain, showing several important structuresThe human brain, the focal point of the central nervous system  in humans, controls the peripheral nervous system. In addition to
controlling "lower," involuntary, or primarily autonomic  activities such as respiration  and digestion, it is also the locus of
"higher" order functioning such as thought, reasoning, and abstraction.[202]  These cognitive processes  constitute the mind, and,
along with their behavioral  consequences, are studied in the field of psychology.

Generally regarded as more capable of these higher order activities, the human brain is believed to be more "intelligent" in
general than that of any other known species. While some non-human species are capable of creating structures and using simple
tools—mostly through instinct and mimicry—human technology is vastly more complex, and is constantly evolving and improving
through time.

SLEEP AND DREAMING
Main articles: Sleep  and DreamHumans are generally diurnal. The average sleep requirement is between seven and nine hours per day for an adult and nine to ten
hours per day for a child; elderly people usually sleep for six to seven hours. Having less sleep than this is common among
humans, even though sleep deprivation  can have negative health effects. A sustained restriction of adult sleep to four hours per
day has been shown to correlate with changes in physiology and mental state, including reduced memory, fatigue, aggression, and
bodily discomfort.[203]  During sleep humans dream. In dreaming humans experience sensory images and sounds, in a sequence which
the dreamer usually perceives more as an apparent participant than as an observer. Dreaming is stimulated by the pons  and mostly
occurs during the REM phase of sleep.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND THOUGHT
Main articles: Consciousness  and CognitionHumans are one of the relatively few species to have sufficient self-awareness to recognize themselves in a mirror.[204]  Already
at 18 months, most human children are aware that the mirror image is not another person.[205]

Humans in a lecture at the Faculty of Biomedical Engineering, CTU, in Prague.The human brain perceives  the external world through the senses, and each individual human is influenced greatly by his or her
experiences, leading to subjective  views of existence  and the passage of time. Humans are variously said to possess
consciousness, self-awareness, and a mind, which correspond roughly to the mental processes of thought. These are said to possess
qualities such as self-awareness, sentience, sapience, and the ability to perceive the relationship between oneself  and one's 
environment. The extent to which the mind constructs or experiences the outer world is a matter of debate, as are the definitions
and validity of many of the terms used above.

The physical aspects of the mind and brain, and by extension of the nervous system, are studied in the field of neurology, the
more behavioral in the field of psychology, and a sometimes loosely defined area between in the field of psychiatry, which treats
mental illness and behavioral disorders. Psychology does not necessarily refer to the brain or nervous system, and can be framed
purely in terms of phenomenological  or information processing  theories of the mind. Increasingly, however, an understanding of
brain functions is being included in psychological theory and practice, particularly in areas such as artificial intelligence, 
neuropsychology, and cognitive neuroscience.

The nature of thought is central to psychology and related fields. Cognitive psychology  studies cognition, the mental processes' 
underlying behavior. It uses information processing  as a framework for understanding the mind. Perception, learning, problem
solving, memory, attention, language and emotion are all well researched areas as well. Cognitive psychology is associated with a
school of thought known as cognitivism, whose adherents argue for an information processing  model of mental function, informed by
 positivism  and experimental psychology. Techniques and models from cognitive psychology are widely applied and form the mainstay
of psychological theories in many areas of both research and applied psychology. Largely focusing on the development of the human
mind through the life span, developmental psychology  seeks to understand how people come to perceive, understand, and act within
the world and how these processes change as they age. This may focus on intellectual, cognitive, neural, social, or moral
development.

Some philosophers divide consciousness into phenomenal consciousness, which is experience itself, and access consciousness, which
is the processing of the things in experience.[206]  Phenomenal consciousness is the state of being conscious, such as when they
say "I am conscious." Access consciousness is being conscious of  something in relation to abstract concepts, such as when one
says "I am conscious of these words." Various forms of access consciousness include awareness, self-awareness, conscience, stream
of consciousness, Husserl's phenomenology, and intentionality. The concept of phenomenal consciousness, in modern history,
according to some, is closely related to the concept of qualia. Social psychology  links sociology with psychology in their shared
study of the nature and causes of human social interaction, with an emphasis on how people think towards each other and how they
relate to each other. The behavior and mental processes, both human and non-human, can be described through animal cognition, 
ethology, evolutionary psychology, and comparative psychology  as well. Human ecology  is an academic discipline  that
investigates how humans and human societies  interact with both their natural environment and the human social environment.

MOTIVATION AND EMOTION
Main articles: Motivation  and Emotion
Illustration of grief from Charles Darwin's book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals.Motivation is the driving force
of desire behind all deliberate actions  of humans. Motivation is based on emotion—specifically, on the search for satisfaction 
(positive emotional experiences), and the avoidance of conflict. Positive and negative is defined by the individual brain state,
which may be influenced by social norms: a person may be driven to self-injury  or violence  because their brain  is conditioned
to create a positive response to these actions. Motivation is important because it is involved in the performance of all learned
responses. Within psychology, conflict avoidance  and the libido  are seen to be primary motivators. Within economics, motivation
is often seen to be based on incentives; these may be financial, moral, or coercive. Religions  generally posit divine or demonic 
influences.

Happiness, or the state of being happy, is a human emotional condition. The definition of happiness is a common philosophical 
topic. Some people might define it as the best condition that a human can have—a condition of mental  and physical health. Others
define it as freedom  from want and distress; consciousness of the good  order of things; assurance of one's place in the universe 
 or society.

Emotion has a significant influence on, or can even be said to control, human behavior, though historically many cultures  and 
philosophers  have for various reasons discouraged allowing this influence to go unchecked. Emotional experiences perceived as 
pleasant, such as love, admiration, or joy, contrast with those perceived as unpleasant, like hate, envy, or sorrow. There is
often a distinction made between refined emotions that are socially learned and survival  oriented emotions, which are thought to
be innate. Human exploration of emotions as separate from other neurological phenomena is worthy of note, particularly in cultures
where emotion is considered separate from physiological state. In some cultural medical theories emotion is considered so
synonymous with certain forms of physical health that no difference is thought to exist. The Stoics  believed excessive emotion
was harmful, while some Sufi  teachers felt certain extreme emotions could yield a conceptual perfection, what is often translated
as ecstasy.

In modern scientific thought, certain refined emotions are considered a complex neural trait innate in a variety of domesticated 
and non-domesticated mammals. These were commonly developed in reaction to superior survival mechanisms and intelligent
interaction with each other and the environment; as such, refined emotion is not in all cases as discrete and separate from
natural neural function as was once assumed. However, when humans function in civilized tandem, it has been noted that uninhibited
acting on extreme emotion can lead to social disorder and crime.

SEXUALITY AND LOVE
Main articles: Love  and Human sexuality
Human parents continue caring for their offspring long after they are born.For humans, sexuality has important social functions:
it creates physical intimacy, bonds and hierarchies among individuals, besides ensuring biological reproduction. Sexual desire or 
libido, is experienced as a bodily urge, often accompanied by strong emotions such as love, ecstasy  and jealousy. The
significance of sexuality in the human species is reflected in a number of physical features among them hidden ovulation, the
evolution of external scrotum  and penis  suggesting sperm competition, the absence of an os penis, permanent secondary sexual
characteristics  and the forming of pair bonds  based on sexual attraction as a common social structure. Contrary to other
primates that often advertise estrus  through visible signs, human females do not have a distinct or visible signs of ovulation,
plus they experience sexual desire outside of their fertile periods. These adaptations indicate that the meaning of sexuality in
humans is similar to that found in the bonobo, and that the complex human sexual behavior has a long evolutionary  history.[207]

Human choices in acting on sexuality are commonly influenced by cultural norms which vary widely. Restrictions are often
determined by religious beliefs or social customs. The pioneering researcher Sigmund Freud  believed that humans are born 
polymorphously perverse, which means that any number of objects could be a source of pleasure. According to Freud humans then pass
through five stages of psychosexual development  and can fixate on any stage because of various traumas during the process. For 
Alfred Kinsey, another influential sex researcher, people can fall anywhere along a continuous scale of sexual orientation, with
only small minorities fully heterosexual  or homosexual.[208]  Recent studies of neurology  and genetics  suggest people may be
born predisposed to various sexual tendencies.[209]

BEHAVIOR
Main articles: Culture, Society, and Human behaviorHuman society statisticsWorld population[210]7.5 billionPopulation density[210]

[211]15/km2  (38/sq mi) by total area
50/km2  (130/sq mi) by land areaLargest agglomerations
[citation needed]Beijing, Bogotá, Buenos Aires, Cairo, Delhi, Dhaka, Guangzhou, Istanbul, Jakarta, Karachi, Kinshasa, Kolkata, 
Lagos, Lima, London, Los Angeles, Manila, Mexico City, Moscow, Mumbai, New York City, Osaka, Paris, Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, 
Seoul, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tehran, Tianjin, Tokyo, WuhanMost widely spoken native languages[212]Chinese, Spanish, English, Hindi, 
Arabic, Portuguese, Bengali, Russian, Japanese, Javanese, German, Lahnda, Telugu, Marathi, Tamil, French, Vietnamese, Korean, Urdu
, Italian, Malay, Persian, Turkish, Polish, OriyaMost popular religions[213]Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, 
Judaism, Baha'iGDP  (nominal)
[citation needed]US$36,356,240 million
(US$5,797 per capita)GDP (PPP)
[citation needed]$51,656,251 million IND
($8,236 per capita)
Humans often live in family-based social structures.Humans are highly social beings and tend to live in large complex social
groups. More than any other creature, humans are capable of utilizing systems of communication  for self-expression, the exchange
of ideas, and organization, and as such have created complex social structures  composed of many cooperating and competing groups.
Human groups range from the size of families to nations. Social interactions between humans have established an extremely wide
variety[clarification needed]  of values, social norms, and rituals, which together form the basis of human society.

Culture is defined here as patterns of complex symbolic behavior, i.e. all behavior that is not innate but which has to be learned
through social interaction with others; such as the use of distinctive material  and symbolic systems, including language, ritual,
social organization, traditions, beliefs and technology.

LANGUAGE
While many species communicate, language  is unique to humans, a defining feature of humanity, and a cultural universal. Unlike
the limited systems of other animals, human language is open – an infinite number of meanings can be produced by combining a
limited number of symbols. Human language also has the capacity of displacement, using words to represent things and happenings
that are not presently or locally occurring, but reside in the shared imagination of interlocutors.[95]  Language differs from
other forms of communication in that it is modality independent; the same meanings can be conveyed through different media,
auditively in speech, visually by sign language or writing, and even through tactile media such as braille. Language is central to
the communication between humans, and to the sense of identity that unites nations, cultures and ethnic groups. The invention of
writing systems at least five thousand years ago allowed the preservation of language on material objects, and was a major
technological advancement. The science of linguistics  describes the structure and function of language and the relationship
between languages. There are approximately six thousand different languages currently in use, including sign languages, and many
thousands more that are extinct.[214]

GENDER ROLES
Main articles: Gender role  and GenderThe sexual division of humans into male and female has been marked culturally by a
corresponding division of roles, norms, practices, dress, behavior, rights, duties, privileges, status, and power. Cultural
differences  by gender have often been believed to have arisen naturally out of a division of reproductive labor; the biological
fact that women give birth led to their further cultural responsibility for nurturing and caring for children. Gender roles have
varied historically, and challenges to predominant gender norms have recurred in many societies.

KINSHIP
Main articles: Kinship  and MarriageSessue Hayakawa  (left) with actress and wife Tsuru Aoki  in a screen shot of the 1919 film 
The Dragon Painter.All human societies organize, recognize and classify types of social relationships based on relations between
parents and children (consanguinity), and relations through marriage (affinity). These kinds of relations are generally called
kinship relations. In most societies kinship places mutual responsibilities and expectations of solidarity on the individuals that
are so related, and those who recognize each other as kinsmen come to form networks through which other social institutions can be
regulated. Among the many functions of kinship is the ability to form descent groups, groups of people sharing a common line of
descent, which can function as political units such as clans. Another function is the way in which kinship unites families through
marriage, forming kinship alliances  between groups of wife-takers and wife-givers. Such alliances also often have important
political and economical ramifications, and may result in the formation of political organization above the community level.
Kinship relations often includes regulations for whom an individual should or shouldn't marry. All societies have rules of incest
taboo, according to which marriage between certain kinds of kin relations are prohibited – such rules vary widely between
cultures.[citation needed]  Some societies also have rules of preferential marriage with certain kin relations, frequently with
either cross or parallel cousins. Rules and norms for marriage and social behavior among kinsfolk is often reflected in the
systems of kinship terminology  in the various languages of the world. In many societies kinship relations can also be formed
through forms of co-habitation, adoption, fostering, or companionship, which also tends to create relations of enduring solidarity
(nurture kinship).

ETHNICITY
Main article: Ethnic groupHumans often form ethnic groups, such groups tend to be larger than kinship networks and be organized
around a common identity defined variously in terms of shared ancestry and history, shared cultural norms and language, or shared
biological phenotype. Such ideologies of shared characteristics are often perpetuated in the form of powerful, compelling
narratives that give legitimacy and continuity to the set of shared values. Ethnic groupings often correspond to some level of
political organization such as the band, tribe, city state  or nation. Although ethnic groups appear and disappear through
history, members of ethnic groups often conceptualize their groups as having histories going back into the deep past. Such
ideologies give ethnicity a powerful role in defining social identity  and in constructing solidarity between members of an
ethno-political unit. This unifying property of ethnicity has been closely tied to the rise of the nation state  as the
predominant form of political organization in the 19th and 20th century.[215][216][217][218][219][220]

SOCIETY, GOVERNMENT, AND POLITICS
Main articles: Origins of society, Society, Government, Politics, and State (polity)
The United Nations  Headquarters  in New York City, which houses one of the largest political organizations in the world
Russian honor guard at Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.Society is the system of organizations and institutions arising from
interaction between humans. A state is an organized political community occupying a definite territory, having an organized
government, and possessing internal and external sovereignty. Recognition of the state's claim to independence by other states,
enabling it to enter into international agreements, is often important to the establishment of its statehood. The "state" can also
be defined in terms of domestic conditions, specifically, as conceptualized by Max Weber, "a state is a human community that
(successfully) claims the monopoly of the 'legitimate' use of physical force within a given territory."[221]

Government can be defined as the political means of creating and enforcing laws; typically via a bureaucratic  hierarchy. Politics
is the process by which decisions are made within groups; this process often involves conflict as well as compromise. Although the
term is generally applied to behavior within governments, politics is also observed in all human group interactions, including
corporate, academic, and religious institutions. Many different political systems exist, as do many different ways of
understanding them, and many definitions overlap. Examples of governments include monarchy, Communist state, military dictatorship
, theocracy, and liberal democracy, the last of which is considered dominant today. All of these issues have a direct relationship
with economics.

TRADE AND ECONOMICS
Main articles: Trade  and EconomicsBuyers  and sellers  bargaining  in a marketTrade is the voluntary exchange of goods and
services, and is a form of economics. A mechanism that allows trade is called a market. Modern traders instead generally negotiate
through a medium of exchange, such as money. As a result, buying can be separated from selling, or earning. Because of
specialization and division of labor, most people concentrate on a small aspect of manufacturing or service, trading their labor
for products. Trade exists between regions because different regions have an absolute  or comparative advantage  in the production
of some tradable commodity, or because different regions' size allows for the benefits of mass production.

Economics is a social science  which studies the production, distribution, trade, and consumption of goods and services. Economics
focuses on measurable variables, and is broadly divided into two main branches: microeconomics, which deals with individual
agents, such as households and businesses, and macroeconomics, which considers the economy as a whole, in which case it considers 
aggregate supply  and demand  for money, capital  and commodities. Aspects receiving particular attention in economics are 
resource allocation, production, distribution, trade, and competition. Economic logic is increasingly applied to any problem that
involves choice under scarcity or determining economic value.

WAR
Main article: WarWar is a state of organized armed conflict between states  or non-state actors. War is characterized by the use of lethal violence 
 against others – whether between combatants  or upon non-combatants  – to achieve military goals through force. Lesser, often
spontaneous conflicts, such as brawls, riots, revolts, and melees, are not considered to be warfare. Revolutions  can be 
nonviolent  or an organized and armed revolution which denotes a state of war. During the 20th century, it is estimated that
between 167 and 188 million people died as a result of war.[222]  A common definition defines war as a series of military
campaigns  between at least two opposing sides involving a dispute over sovereignty, territory, resources, religion, or other
issues. A war between internal elements of a state is a civil war. Among animals, all-out war against fellow members of the same
species occurs only among large societies of humans and ants.[citation needed]

There have been a wide variety of rapidly advancing  tactics  throughout the history of war, ranging from conventional war  to 
asymmetric warfare  to total war  and unconventional warfare. Techniques include hand to hand combat, the use of ranged weapons, 
naval warfare, and, more recently, air support. Military intelligence has often played a key role in determining victory and
defeat. Propaganda, which often includes information, slanted opinion and disinformation, plays a key role both in maintaining
unity within a warring group and in sowing discord among opponents. In modern warfare, soldiers  and combat vehicles  are used to
control the land, warships  the sea, and aircraft  the sky. These fields have also overlapped in the forms of marines, 
paratroopers, aircraft carriers, and surface-to-air missiles, among others. Satellites  in low Earth orbit  have made outer space
a factor in warfare as well as it is used for detailed intelligence gathering, however no known aggressive actions have been 
taken
from space.

 * The mushroom cloud  of the atomic bombing of Nagasaki  on August 9, 1945.
   
   
 * Soldiers in front of the wood of Hougoumont during the reenactment of the battle of Waterloo (1815), June 2011, Waterloo,
   Belgium.
   
   

MATERIAL CULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY
Main articles: Tool  and Technology
An array of Neolithic artifacts, including bracelets, axe heads, chisels, and polishing tools.Stone tools were used by
proto-humans at least 2.5 million years ago.[223]  The controlled use of fire  began around 1.5 million years ago. Since then,
humans have made major advances, developing complex technology to create tools to aid their lives and allowing for other
advancements in culture. Major leaps in technology include the discovery of agriculture – what is known as the Neolithic
Revolution, and the invention of automated machines in the Industrial Revolution.

Archaeology  attempts to tell the story of past or lost cultures in part by close examination of the artifacts  they produced.
Early humans left stone tools, pottery, and jewelry  that are particular to various regions and times.

BODY CULTURE
Main articles: Clothing, Body modification, and HaircutThroughout history, humans have altered their appearance by wearing
clothing[224]  and adornments, by trimming or shaving  hair or by means of body modifications.

Body modification is the deliberate altering of the human body  for any non-medical reason, such as aesthetics, sexual
enhancement, a rite of passage, religious reasons, to display group membership or affiliation, to create body art, shock value, or
self-expression.[225]  In its most broad definition it includes plastic surgery, socially acceptable decoration (e.g. common ear
piercing  in many societies), and religious rites of passage (e.g. circumcision  in a number of cultures).[225]

PHILOSOPHY AND SELF-REFLECTION
Main articles: Philosophy  and Human self-reflectionSee also: Human nature
Statue of Confucius  on Chongming Island  in ShanghaiPhilosophy is a discipline or field of study involving the investigation,
analysis, and development of ideas at a general, abstract, or fundamental level. It is the discipline searching for a general
understanding of reality, reasoning and values. Major fields of philosophy include logic, metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy
of
mind, and axiology  (which includes ethics  and aesthetics). Philosophy covers a very wide range of approaches, and is used to
refer to a worldview, to a perspective on an issue, or to the positions argued for by a particular philosopher or school of
philosophy.

RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY
Main articles: Religion  and SpiritualityReligion is generally defined as a belief  system concerning the supernatural, sacred  or divine, and practices, values,
institutions and rituals  associated with such belief. Some religions also have a moral code. The evolution  and the history of
the first religions  have recently become areas of active scientific investigation.[226][227][228]  However, in the course of its 
development, religion has taken on many forms that vary by culture and individual perspective. Some of the chief questions and
issues religions are concerned with include life after death (commonly involving belief in an afterlife), the origin of life, the
nature of the universe  (religious cosmology) and its ultimate fate  (eschatology), and what is moral  or immoral. A common source
for answers to these questions are beliefs in transcendent  divine  beings such as deities  or a singular God, although not all
religions are theistic. Spirituality, belief or involvement in matters of the soul  or spirit, is one of the many different
approaches humans take in trying to answer fundamental questions about humankind's place in the universe, the meaning of life, and
the ideal way to live one's life. Though these topics have also been addressed by philosophy, and to some extent by science,
spirituality is unique in that it focuses on mystical  or supernatural concepts such as karma  and God.

Although the exact level of religiosity can be hard to measure,[229]  a majority of humans professes some variety of religious or
spiritual belief, although many (in some countries a majority) are irreligious. This includes humans who have no religious beliefs
or do not identify with any religion. Humanism  is a philosophy which seeks to include all of humanity and all issues common to
humans; it is usually non-religious. Most religions and spiritual beliefs are clearly distinct from science on both a
philosophical and methodological level; the two are not generally considered mutually exclusive and a majority of humans hold a
mix of both scientific and religious views. The distinction between philosophy and religion, on the other hand, is at times less
clear, and the two are linked in such fields as the philosophy of religion  and theology.

ART, MUSIC, AND LITERATURE
Main articles: Art, Music, and LiteratureAllegory of Music  (ca. 1594), a painting  of a woman writing sheet music  by Lorenzo
LippiArt is a cultural universal, and humans have been producing artistic works at least since the days of Cro Magnon. Art may be
defined as a form of cultural  expression and the usage of narratives  of liberation and exploration (i.e. art history, art
criticism, and art theory) to mediate its boundaries. This distinction may be applied to objects or performances, current or
historical, and its prestige extends to those who made, found, exhibit, or own them. In the modern use of the word, art is
commonly understood to be the process or result of making material works that, from concept to creation, adhere to the "creative
impulse" of human beings. Art is distinguished from other works by being in large part unprompted by necessity, by biological
drive, or by any undisciplined pursuit of recreation.

Music is a natural intuitive  phenomenon based on the three distinct and interrelated organization structures of rhythm, harmony,
and melody. Listening to music is perhaps the most common and universal form of entertainment, while learning and understanding it
are popular disciplines.[citation needed]  There are a wide variety of music genres  and ethnic musics. Literature, the body of
written—and possibly oral—works, especially creative ones, includes prose, poetry and drama, both fiction and non-fiction.
Literature includes such genres as epic, legend, myth, ballad, and folklore.

SCIENCE
Main article: ScienceAnother unique aspect of human culture and thought is the development of complex methods for acquiring
knowledge through observation, quantification, and verification. The scientific method  has been developed to acquire knowledge of
the physical world and the rules, processes and principles of which it consists, and combined with mathematics it enables the
prediction of complex patterns of causality and consequence. Some other animals are able to recognize differences in small
quantities,[citation needed]  but humans are able to understand and recognize much larger, even abstract, quantities, and to
recognize and understand algorithmic patterns which enables infinite counting  routines and algebra, something that is not found
in any other species.

SEE ALSO
 * Mammals portal

 * Holocene calendar
 * Human impact on the environment

REFERENCES
 1.   ^ a  b  Groves, C.P.  (2005). Wilson, D.E.; Reeder, D.M., eds. Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic
      Reference  (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. OCLC62265494. ISBN 0-801-88221-4.
 2.   ^  Global Mammal Assessment Team (2008). "Homo sapiens". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.  Version 2013.2. 
      International
      Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 6 April  2014.
 3.   ^  Goodman M, Tagle D, Fitch D, Bailey W, Czelusniak J, Koop B, Benson P, Slightom J (1990). "Primate evolution at the DNA
      level and a classification of hominoids". J Mol Evol. 30  (3): 260–66. doi:10.1007/BF02099995. PMID2109087.
 4.   ^  "Hominidae Classification". Animal Diversity Web @ UMich. Retrieved 2006-09-25.
 5.   ^  Tattersall Ian; Schwartz Jeffrey (2009). "Evolution of the Genus Homo". Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences. 37
      : 67–92. doi:10.1146/annurev.earth.031208.100202.
 6.   ^  Antón, Susan C.; Swisher III, Carl C. (2004). "Early Dispersals of homo from Africa". Annual Review of Anthropology. 33:
      271–96. doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.33.070203.144024.
 7.   ^  Trinkaus Erik (2005). "Early Modern Humans". Annual Review of Anthropology. 34: 207–30. doi:
      10.1146/annurev.anthro.34.030905.154913.
 8.   ^  McHenry, H.M (2009). "Human Evolution". In Michael Ruse; Joseph Travis. Evolution: The First Four Billion Years.
      Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. p. 265. ISBN978-0-674-03175-3.
 9.   ^  Marshall T. Poe A History of Communications: Media and Society from the Evolution of Speech to the Internet. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press, 2011. ISBN 9780521179447
 10.  ^  "Hunting and gathering culture". Encyclopædia Britannica  (online). Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016.
 11.  ^  "Neolithic." Ancient History Encyclopedia. Ancient History Encyclopedia Limited. 2014.
 12.  ^  "World Population Clock". Census.gov. United States Census Bureau, Population Division. Retrieved 2016-02-26.
 13.  ^  OED, s.v.  "human."
 14.  ^  The OED  considers obsolete the sense "a designation applied equally to particular individuals of either sex," citing a
      1597 source as the most recent ("The Lord had but one paire of men in Paradise.") while it continues to endorse the sense
      "as a general or indefinite designation" as current in English.
 15.  ^  Spamer, Earle E (29 January 1999). "Know Thyself: Responsible Science and the Lectotype of Homo sapiens Linnaeus, 1758". 
      Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences. 149  (1): 109–114. JSTOR4065043.
 16.  ^  Porkorny (1959)  s.v. "g'hðem" pp. 414–416; "Homo." Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1). Random House, Inc. 23 September
      2008. "Homo". Dictionary.com.
 17.  ^  "Homo sapiens Etymology". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 25 July  2015.
 18.  ^  "Hints of Earlier Human Exit From Africa". Science News. doi:10.1126/science.1199113. Retrieved 2011-05-01.
 19.  ^  Paul Rincon Humans 'left Africa much earlier'  BBC News, 27 January 2011
 20.  ^  Lowe, David J. (2008). "Polynesian settlement of New Zealand and the impacts of volcanism on early Maori society: an
      update"  (PDF). University of Waikato. Retrieved 29 April  2010.
 21.  ^  Appenzeller Tim (2012). "Human migrations: Eastern odyssey". Nature. 485: 24–26. doi:10.1038/485024a.
 22.  ^ a  b  Wood, Bernard; Richmond, Brian G. (2000). "Human evolution: taxonomy and paleobiology". Journal of Anatomy. 197 
      (1): 19–60. doi:10.1046/j.1469-7580.2000.19710019.x. PMC1468107. PMID10999270.
 23.  ^  Ajit, Varki and David L. Nelson. 2007. Genomic Comparisons of Humans and Chimpanzees. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2007.
      36:191–209: "Sequence differences from the human genome were confirmed to be ∼1% in areas that can be precisely aligned,
      representing ∼35 million single base-pair differences. Some 45 million nucleotides of insertions and deletions unique to
      each lineage were also discovered, making the actual difference between the two genomes ∼4%."
 24.  ^  Ken Sayers, Mary Ann Raghanti, and C. Owen Lovejoy. 2012 (forthcoming, october) Human Evolution and the Chimpanzee
      Referential Doctrine. Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 41
 25.  ^  Ruvolo, M. 1997. Genetic Diversity in Hominoid Primates. Annual Review of Anthropology , Vol. 26, (1997), pp. 515–40
 26.  ^  Ruvolo, Maryellen (1997). "Molecular phylogeny of the hominoids: inferences from multiple independent DNA sequence data
      sets". Molecular Biology and Evolution. 14  (3): 248–65. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a025761. PMID9066793.
 27.  ^  Human Chromosome 2 is a fusion of two ancestral chromosomes  by Alec MacAndrew; accessed 18 May 2006.
 28.  ^  Evidence of Common Ancestry: Human Chromosome 2  (video) 2007
 29.  ^  Begun, David R. 2010. Miocene Hominids and the Origins of the African Apes and Humans. Annual Review of Anthropology,
      Vol. 39: 67–84
 30.  ^  Begun David R.; Nargolwalla Mariam C.; Kordos Laszlo (2012). "European Miocene Hominids and the Origin of the African Ape
      and Human Clade". Evolutionary Anthropology. 21  (1): 10–23. doi:10.1002/evan.20329. PMID22307721.
 31.  ^  "'First human' discovered in Ethiopia". BBC News.
 32.  ^  Harmand, Sonia; Lewis, Jason E.; Feibel, Craig S.; Lepre, Christopher J.; Prat, Sandrine; Lenoble, Arnaud; Boës, Xavier;
      Quinn, Rhonda L.; Brenet, Michel; Arroyo, Adrian; Taylor, Nicholas; Clément, Sophie; Daver, Guillaume; Brugal, Jean-Philip;
      Leakey, Louise; Mortlock, Richard A.; Wright, James D.; Lokorodi, Sammy; Kirwa, Christopher; Kent, Dennis V.; Roche, Hélène
      (2015). "3.3-million-year-old stone tools from Lomekwi 3, West Turkana, Kenya". Nature. 521  (7552): 310–5. doi:
      10.1038/nature14464.
 33.  ^  White, Tim D.; Asfaw, B.; DeGusta, D.; Gilbert, H.; Richards, G. D.; Suwa, G.; Howell, F. C. (2003). "Pleistocene Homo
      sapiens  from Middle Awash, Ethiopia". Nature. 423  (6491): 742–47. doi:10.1038/nature01669. PMID12802332
 34.  ^  Trinkaus, E.  (1993). "Femoral neck-shaft angles of the Qafzeh-Skhul early modern humans, and activity levels among
      immature near eastern Middle Paleolithic hominids". Journal of Human Evolution. INIST-CNRS. 25  (5): 393–416. doi:
      10.1006/jhev.1993.1058. ISSN0047-2484.
 35.  ^  Boyd, Robert; Silk, Joan B. (2003). How Humans Evolved. New York, New York: Norton. ISBN0-393-97854-0.
 36.  ^  Brues, Alice M.; Snow, Clyde C. (1965). "Physical Anthropology". Biennial Review of Anthropology. 4: 1–39. ISBN
      9780804717465.
 37.  ^  Brunet, Michel; Guy, Franck; Pilbeam, David; Mackaye, Hassane Taisso; Likius, Andossa; Ahounta, Djimdoumalbaye;
      Beauvilain, Alain; Blondel, Cécile; Bocherens, Hervé; Boisserie, Jean-Renaud; De Bonis, Louis; Coppens, Yves; Dejax, Jean;
      Denys, Christiane; Duringer, Philippe; Eisenmann, Véra; Fanone, Gongdibé; Fronty, Pierre; Geraads, Denis; Lehmann, Thomas;
      Lihoreau, Fabrice; Louchart, Antoine; Mahamat, Adoum; Merceron, Gildas; Mouchelin, Guy; Otero, Olga; Campomanes, Pablo
      Pelaez; De Leon, Marcia Ponce; Rage, Jean-Claude; Sapanet, Michel; Schuster, Mathieu; Sudre, Jean; Tassy, Pascal; Valentin,
      Xavier; Vignaud, Patrick; Viriot, Laurent; Zazzo, Antoine; Zollikofer, Christoph (2002). "A new hominid from the Upper
      Miocene of Chad, Central Africa". Nature. 418  (6894): 145–51. doi:10.1038/nature00879. PMID12110880.
 38.  ^ a  b  P. Thomas Schoenemann (2006). "Evolution of the Size and Functional Areas of the Human Brain". Annu. Rev. Anthropol.
       35: 379–406. doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.35.081705.123210.
 39.  ^  Homo neanderthalensis – H. neanderthalensis is a widely known but poorly understood hominid ancestor.
      Archaeologyinfo.com. Retrieved on 2014-05-24.
 40.  ^  Park, Min S.; Nguyen, Andrew D.; Aryan, Henry E.; U, Hoi Sang; Levy, Michael L.; Semendeferi, Katerina (2007). "Evolution
      of the human brain: changing brain size and the fossil record". Neurosurgery. 60  (3): 555–62. doi:
      10.1227/01.NEU.0000249284.54137.32. PMID17327801.
 41.  ^  Bruner, Emiliano (2007). "Cranial shape and size variation in human evolution: structural and functional perspectives". 
      Child's Nervous System. 23  (12): 1357–65. doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0434-2. PMID17680251.
 42.  ^  Potts Richard (2012). "Evolution and Environmental Change in Early Human Prehistory". Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 41: 151–67. 
      doi:10.1146/annurev-anthro-092611-145754.
 43.  ^  Leonard William R.; Snodgrass J. Josh; Robertson Marcia L. (2007). "Effects of Brain Evolution on Human Nutrition and
      Metabolism". Annu. Rev. Nutr. 27: 311–27. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.27.061406.093659. PMID17439362.
 44.  ^  "06.14.99 – Meat-eating was essential for human evolution, says UC Berkeley anthropologist specializing in diet". 
      Berkeley.edu. 1999-06-14. Retrieved 2012-01-31.
 45.  ^  "Meat in the human diet: an anthropological perspective. – Free Online Library". Thefreelibrary.com. 2007-09-01.
      Retrieved 2012-01-31.
 46.  ^  Organ, Chris (22 August 2011). "Phylogenetic rate shifts in feeding time during the evolution of Homo". PNAS. Retrieved 
      17 April  2012.
 47.  ^  Dunbar, Robin I.M. (1998). "The Social Brain Hypothesis"  (PDF). Evolutionary anthropology. Retrieved 8 June  2016.
 48.  ^  Nowell April (2010). "Defining Behavioral Modernity in the Context of Neandertal and Anatomically Modern Human
      Populations". Annual Review of Anthropology. 39: 437–52. doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.012809.105113.
 49.  ^  Francesco d'Errico; Chris B (2011). "Evolution, revolution or saltation scenario for the emergence of modern cultures?". 
      Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B. 366  (1567): 1060–69. doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0340. PMC3049097. PMID21357228.
 50.  ^  Wood, Bernard A. (2009). "Where does the genus Homo  begin, and how would we know?". In Grine, Frederick E.; Fleagle,
      John G.; Leakey, Richard E. The First Humans: Origin and Early Evolution of the Genus Homo. London, UK: Springer. pp. 17–27.
       ISBN978-1-4020-9979-3.
 51.  ^  Brown, Terence A. (8 April 2010). "Human evolution: Stranger from Siberia". Nature. 464  (7290): 838–839. doi:
      10.1038/464838a. PMID20376137.
 52.  ^  Reich, David; Patterson, Nick; Kircher, Martin; Delfin, Frederick; Nandineni, Madhusudan R.; Pugach, Irina; Ko, Albert
      Min-Shan; Ko, Ying-Chin; Jinam, Timothy A.; Phipps, Maude E.; Saitou, Naruya; Wollstein, Andreas; Kayser, Manfred; Pääbo,
      Svante; Stoneking, Mark (2011). "Denisova Admixture and the First Modern Human Dispersals into Southeast Asia and Oceania". 
      The American Journal of Human Genetics. 89  (4): 516–28. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.09.005. PMC3188841. PMID21944045.
 53.  ^  Hebsgaard MB, Wiuf C, Gilbert MT, Glenner H, Willerslev E (2007). "Evaluating Neanderthal genetics and phylogeny". J.
      Mol. Evol. 64  (1): 50–60. doi:10.1007/s00239-006-0017-y. PMID17146600.
 54.  ^  Zimmer, Carl  (17 March 2016). "Humans Interbred With Hominins on Multiple Occasions, Study Finds". The New York Times.
      Retrieved 17 March  2016.
 55.  ^  Vigilant; et al. (1991). "African populations and the evolution of human mitochondrial DNA". Science. 253  (5027):
      1503–07. doi:10.1126/science.1840702. PMID1840702.
 56.  ^  Wolman, David (April 3, 2008). "Fossil Feces Is Earliest Evidence of N. America Humans". news.nationalgeographic.com.
 57.  ^  Wood B (1996). "Human evolution". BioEssays. 18  (12): 945–54. doi:10.1002/bies.950181204. PMID8976151.
 58.  ^  Thomas F. X. Noble; Barry Strauss; Duane Osheim; Kristen Neuschel; Elinor Accamp. Cengage Advantage Books: Western
      Civilization: Beyond Boundaries. ISBN9781285661537. Retrieved 11 July  2015.
 59.  ^  Spielvogel, Jackson. "Western Civilization: Volume A: To 1500". Cenpage Learning. Retrieved 11 July  2015.
 60.  ^  Thornton, Bruce (2002). Greek Ways: How the Greeks Created Western Civilization. San Francisco, CA, USA: Encounter Books.
      pp. 1–14. ISBN1-893554-57-0.
 61.  ^  "Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century". greatachievements.org. Retrieved 7 April  2015.
 62.  ^  "GeoHive – Regional Population 1750–2050". GeoHive. Retrieved 8 June  2016.
 63.  ^  "Twentieth Century Atlas - Worldwide Statistics of Casualties, Massacres, Disasters and Atrocities". Necrometrics.com.
      Retrieved 8 June  2016.
 64.  ^  "Internet Usage Statistics – The Internet Big Picture". Internet World Stats. Retrieved 19 November  2010.
 65.  ^  "Reuters homepage". Reuters. Retrieved 19 November  2010.[dead link]
 66.  ^  Pimm, S.; Raven, P.; Peterson, A.; Sekercioglu, C. H.; Ehrlich, P. R. (2006). "Human impacts on the rates of recent,
      present, and future bird extinctions". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 103  (29): 10941–6. doi:
      10.1073/pnas.0604181103. PMC1544153. PMID16829570.
      *Barnosky AD, Koch PL, Feranec RS, Wing SL, Shabel AB (2004). "Assessing the causes of late Pleistocene extinctions on the
      continents". Science. 306  (5693): 70–75. doi:10.1126/science.1101476. PMID15459379.
 67.  ^  Lewis, O. T. (2006). "Climate change, species-area curves and the extinction crisis". Philosophical Transactions of the
      Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 361  (1465): 163–71. doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1712. PMC1831839. PMID16553315.
 68.  ^  Bunn SE, Arthington AH (2002). "Basic principles and ecological consequences of altered flow regimes for aquatic
      biodiversity". Environmental Management. 30  (4): 492–507. PMID12481916.
 69.  ^  Nancy Atkinson (2009-03-26). "Soyuz Rockets to Space; 13 Humans Now in Orbit". Universetoday.com. Retrieved 2011-12-10.
 70.  ^  Kraft, Rachel (December 11, 2010). "JSC celebrates ten years of continuous human presence aboard the International Space
      Station". JSC Features. Johnson Space Center.
 71.  ^  "Mission to Mars: Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity Rover". Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Retrieved August 26,  2015.
 72.  ^  "Touchdown! Rosetta's Philae probe lands on comet". European Space Agency. November 12, 2014. Retrieved August 26,  2015.
 73.  ^  "NEAR-Shoemaker". NASA. Retrieved August 26,  2015.
 74.  ^  "World's population reaches six billion". BBC News. August 5, 1999. Retrieved February 5,  2008.
 75.  ^  "UN population estimates.". Population Division, United Nations. Retrieved 4 July  2013.
 76.  ^  Whitehouse, David (May 19, 2005). "Half of humanity set to go urban". BBC News.
 77.  ^  Urban, Suburban, and Rural Victimization, 1993–98  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,. Accessed 29
      Oct 2006
 78.  ^  "World Urbanization Prospects, the 2011 Revision". Population Division, United Nations. Retrieved 4 July  2013.
 79.  ^  Scientific American  (1998). Evolution and General Intelligence: Three hypotheses on the evolution of general
      intelligence.
 80.  ^  "Climate Change 2001: Working Group I: The Scientific Basis". grida.no/. Retrieved 2007-05-30.
 81.  ^  American Association for the Advancement of Science. Foreword. AAAS Atlas of Population & Environment.
 82.  ^  Wilson, E.O.  (2002). The Future of Life.
 83.  ^  Page 21  Inside the human body: using scientific and exponential notation. Author: Greg Roza. Edition: Illustrated.
      Publisher: The Rosen Publishing Group, 2007. ISBN 1-4042-3362-8, ISBN 978-1-4042-3362-1. Length: 32pages
 84.  ^  "Human Anatomy". Inner Body. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 85.  ^  Parker-Pope, Tara (October 27, 2009). "The Human Body Is Built for Distance". The New York Times.
 86.  ^ a  b  c  O'Neil, Dennis. "Humans". Primates. Palomar College. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 87.  ^  John, Brenman. "What is the role of sweating glands in balancing body temperature when running a marathon?".
      Livestrong.com. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 88.  ^  "Senior Citizens Do Shrink – Just One of the Body Changes of Aging". News. Senior Journal. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 89.  ^  Bogin B, Rios L (September 2003). "Rapid morphological change in living humans: implications for modern human origins". 
      Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A. 136  (1): 71–84. doi:10.1016/S1095-6433(02)00294-5. PMID14527631.
 90.  ^  "Human weight". Articleworld.org. Retrieved 2011-12-10.
 91.  ^  Kushner, Robert (2007). Treatment of the Obese Patient (Contemporary Endocrinology). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press. p. 158. 
      ISBN1-59745-400-1. Retrieved April 5,  2009.
 92.  ^  Adams JP, Murphy PG (2000). "Obesity in anaesthesia and intensive care". British Journal of Anaesthesia. 85  (1): 91–108.
       doi:10.1093/bja/85.1.91. PMID10927998.
 93.  ^  Why Humans and Their Fur Parted Way  by Nicholas Wade, New York Times, August 19, 2003.
 94.  ^  Kirchweger, Gina. "The Biology of Skin Color: Black and White". Evolution: Library. PBS. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 95.  ^ a  b  Collins, Desmond (1976). The Human Revolution: From Ape to Artist. p. 208.
 96.  ^  Therman, Eeva (1980). Human Chromosomes: Structure, Behavior, Effects. Springer US. pp. 112–124. doi:
      10.1007/978-1-4684-0107-3. ISBN978-1-4684-0109-7.
 97.  ^  Pertea, Mihaela; Salzberg, Steven L. (2010). "Between a chicken and a grape: estimating the number of human genes". 
      Genome Biology. 11  (5): 206. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-5-206. PMC2898077. PMID20441615.
 98.  ^  Harpending, H. C.; Batzer, M. A.; Gurven, M.; Jorde, L. B.; Rogers, A. R.; Sherry, S. T. (1998). "Genetic traces of
      ancient demography". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 95  (4): 1961–7. doi:10.1073/pnas.95.4.1961. PMC19224.
       PMID9465125.
 99.  ^  Jorde LB, Rogers AR, Bamshad M, Watkins WS, Krakowiak P, Sung S, Kere J, Harpending HC (1997). "Microsatellite diversity
      and the demographic history of modern humans". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
      America. 94  (7): 3100–3. doi:10.1073/pnas.94.7.3100. PMC20328. PMID9096352.
 100. ^  Jorde, Lynn B; Wooding, Stephen P (2004). "Genetic variation, classification and 'race'". Nature Genetics. 36  (11
      Suppl): S28–33. doi:10.1038/ng1435. PMID15508000.
 101. ^  Tishkoff SA, Kidd KK (2004). "Implications of biogeography of human populations for 'race' and medicine". Nature Genetics
      . 36  (11 Suppl): S21–7. doi:10.1038/ng1438. PMID15507999.
 102. ^  Cann RL, Stoneking M, Wilson AC (1987), "Mitochondrial DNA and human evolution", Nature, 325  (6099): 31–36, Bibcode:
      1987Natur.325...31C, doi:10.1038/325031a0, PMID3025745
 103. ^  Soares P, Ermini L, Thomson N, et al. (June 2009), "Correcting for purifying selection: an improved human mitochondrial
      molecular clock", Am. J. Hum. Genet., 84  (6): 740–59, doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.05.001, PMC2694979, PMID19500773. University
      of Leeds – New 'molecular clock' aids dating of human migration history
 104. ^  Poznik GD, Henn BM, Yee MC, Sliwerska E, Euskirchen GM, Lin AA, Snyder M, Quintana-Murci L, Kidd JM, Underhill PA,
      Bustamante CD (August 2013). "Sequencing Y chromosomes resolves discrepancy in time to common ancestor of males versus
      females". Science. 341  (6145): 562–65. doi:10.1126/science.1237619. PMID23908239.
 105. ^  Pollard KS, Salama SR, Lambert N, Lambot MA, Coppens S, Pedersen JS, Katzman S, King B, Onodera C, Siepel A, Kern AD,
      Dehay C, Igel H, Ares M, Vanderhaeghen P, Haussler D (2006). "An RNA gene expressed during cortical development evolved
      rapidly in humans". Nature. 443  (7108): 167–72. doi:10.1038/nature05113. PMID16915236.
 106. ^  Pollard KS, Salama SR, King B, Kern AD, Dreszer T, Katzman S, Siepel A, Pedersen JS, Bejerano G, Baertsch R, Rosenbloom
      KR, Kent J, Haussler D (2006). "Forces shaping the fastest evolving regions in the human genome". PLoS Genetics. 2  (10):
      e168. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0020168. PMC1599772. PMID17040131.
 107. ^  Wade, Nicholas (March 7, 2007). "Still Evolving, Human Genes Tell New Story". The New York Times. Retrieved 2012-02-13.
 108. ^  According to the July 2: 2007 Newsweek  magazine, a woman dies in childbirth every minute, most often due to uncontrolled
      bleeding and infection, with the world's poorest women most vulnerable. The lifetime risk is 1 in 16 in sub-Saharan Africa,
      compared to 1 in 2,800 in developed countries.
 109. ^  LaVelle, M. (1995). "Natural selection and developmental sexual variation in the human pelvis". American Journal of
      Physical Anthropology. 98  (1): 59–72. doi:10.1002/ajpa.1330980106. PMID8579191.
 110. ^  Correia, H.; Balseiro, S.; De Areia, M. (2005). "Sexual dimorphism in the human pelvis: testing a new hypothesis". Homo. 
      56  (2): 153–160. doi:10.1016/j.jchb.2005.05.003. PMID16130838.
 111. ^  Rush, David (2000). "Nutrition and maternal mortality in the developing world". American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
      72  (1 Suppl): 212S–240S. PMID10871588.
 112. ^  "Low Birthweight". Archived from the original  on May 13, 2007. Retrieved 2007-05-30.
 113. ^  Khor, G. (2003). "Update on the prevalence of malnutrition among children in Asia". Nepal Medical College Journal. 5 
      (2): 113–22. PMID15024783.
 114. ^  Leakey, Richard; Lewin, Roger (1993). Origins Reconsidered: In Search of What Makes Us Human. New York, New York: Anchor
      Books. ISBN978-0-385-46792-6.
 115. ^  Diamond, Jared  (1997). Why is Sex Fun? The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York, New York: Basic Books. pp. 167–70. 
      ISBN0-465-03127-7.
 116. ^  Peccei, Jocelyn Scott (2001). "Menopause: Adaptation or epiphenomenon?". Evolutionary Anthropology. 10  (2): 43–57. doi:
      10.1002/evan.1013.
 117. ^  Kalben, Barbara Blatt (2002). "Why Men Die Younger: Causes of Mortality Differences by Sex". Society of Actuaries.
 118. ^  "CIA World Factbook - World entry". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 5 July  2013.
 119. ^  "Human Development Report 2006,"  United Nations Development Programme, pp. 363–66, November 9, 2006
 120. ^  The World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved April 2, 2005.
 121. ^  "U.N. Statistics on Population Ageing". United Nations. February 28, 2002. Archived from the original  on 2005-12-08.
      Retrieved April 2,  2005.
 122. ^  Maier, Heiner (2010). Supercentenarians. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. p. 288. ISBN978-3-642-11519-6.
 123. ^  Haenel H (1989). "Phylogenesis and nutrition". Nahrung. 33  (9): 867–87. PMID2697806.
 124. ^  Cordain, Loren (2007). "Implications of Plio-pleistocene diets for modern humans". In Peter S. Ungar. Evolution of the
      human diet: the known, the unknown and the unknowable. pp. 264–65. "Since the evolutionary split between hominins and 
      pongids  approximately 7 million years ago, the available evidence shows that all species of hominins ate an omnivorous diet
      composed of minimally processed, wild-plant, and animal foods.
 125. ^  American Dietetic, Association; Dietitians Of, Canada (2003). "Vegetarian Diets". Journal of the American Dietetic
      Association. 103  (6): 748–65. doi:10.1053/jada.2003.50142. PMID12778049.
 126. ^  Cordain L, Eaton SB, Sebastian A, et al. (February 2005). "Origins and evolution of the Western diet: health implications
      for the 21st century". Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 81  (2): 341–54. PMID15699220.
 127. ^  Ulijaszek SJ (November 2002). "Human eating behaviour in an evolutionary ecological context". Proc Nutr Soc. 61  (4):
      517–26. doi:10.1079/PNS2002180. PMID12691181.
 128. ^  Earliest agriculture in the Americas  Earliest cultivation of barley  Archived  February 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
      . Earliest cultivation of figs  – URLs retrieved February 19, 2007
 129. ^  Krebs JR (September 2009). "The gourmet ape: evolution and human food preferences". Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 90  (3):
      707S–711S. doi:10.3945/ajcn.2009.27462B. PMID19656837.
 130. ^  Holden C, Mace R (October 1997). "Phylogenetic analysis of the evolution of lactose digestion in adults". Hum. Biol. 69 
      (5): 605–28. PMID9299882.
 131. ^  United Nations  Information Service. "Independent Expert On Effects Of Structural Adjustment, Special Rapporteur On
      Right
      To Food Present Reports: Commission Continues General Debate On Economic, Social And Cultural Rights". United Nations, March
      29, 2004, p. 6. "Around 36 million people died from hunger directly or indirectly every year.".
 132. ^  Murray C, Lopez A (1997). "Global mortality, disability, and the contribution of risk factors: Global Burden of Disease
      Study". Lancet. 349  (9063): 1436–42. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(96)07495-8. PMID9164317.
 133. ^ a  b  Haslam DW, James WP (October 2005). "Obesity". Lancet. 366  (9492): 1197–209. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67483-1. 
      PMID16198769.
 134. ^  Catenacci VA, Hill JO, Wyatt HR (September 2009). "The obesity epidemic". Clin. Chest Med. 30  (3): 415–44, vii. doi:
      10.1016/j.ccm.2009.05.001. PMID19700042.
 135. ^  Edwards, JH; T Dent; J Kahn (June 1966). "Monozygotic twins of different sex". Journal of Medical Genetics. 3  (2):
      117–23. doi:10.1136/jmg.3.2.117. PMC1012913. PMID6007033.
 136. ^  Machin, GA (January 1996). "Some causes of genotypic and phenotypic discordance in monozygotic twin pairs". American
      Journal of Medical Genetics. 61  (3): 216–28. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-8628(19960122)61:3<216::AID-AJMG5>3.0.CO;2-S. PMID
      8741866.
 137. ^  Liu, Hua; Prugnolle, Franck; Manina, Andrea; Balloux, François (2006). "A geographically explicit genetic model of
      worldwide human-settlement history". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 79  (2): 230–37. doi:10.1086/505436. PMC1559480
      . PMID16826514.
 138. ^  Race, Ethnicity; Genetics Working Group (2005). "The use of racial, ethnic, and ancestral categories in human genetics
      research". American Journal of Human Genetics. 77  (4): 519–32. doi:10.1086/491747. PMC1275602. PMID16175499.
 139. ^  Dr. Shafer, Aaron. "Understanding Genetics". The Tech. Stanford University. Retrieved 13 December  2013. The DNA sequence
      in your genes is on average 99.9% identical to ANY other human being.
 140. ^  "Genetic - Understanding Human Genetic Variation". Human Genetic Variation. National Institute of Health (NIH). Retrieved
       13 December  2013. Between any two humans, the amount of genetic variation—biochemical individuality—is about 0.1%.
 141. ^  "Human Diversity – Go Deeper". Power of an Illusion. PBS. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 142. ^  "Chimps show much greater genetic diversity than humans". Media. University of Oxford. Retrieved 13 December  2013.
 143. ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  Roberts, Dorothy (2011). Fatal Invention. London, New York: The New Press.
 144. ^  O'Neil, Dennis. "Human Biological Adaptability; Overview". Palomar College. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 145. ^  O'Neil, Dennis. "Adapting to Climate Extremes". Human Biological Adaptability. Palomar College. Retrieved 6 January  2013
      .
 146. ^  de Beer H (2004). "Observations on the history of Dutch physical stature from the late-Middle Ages to the present". Econ
      Hum Biol. 2  (1): 45–55. doi:10.1016/j.ehb.2003.11.001. PMID15463992.
 147. ^  Hedrick PW (2011). "Population genetics of malaria resistance in humans". Heredity. 107  (4): 283–304. doi:
      10.1038/hdy.2011.16. PMC3182497. PMID21427751.  
 148. ^  Weatherall DJ (2008). "Genetic variation and susceptibility to infection: The red cell and malaria". British Journal of
      Haematology. 141  (3): 276–86. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07085.x. PMID18410566.
 149. ^  Beja-Pereira A, et al. (2003). "Gene-culture coevolution between cattle milk protein genes and human lactase genes". Nat
      Genet. 35: 311–13. doi:10.1038/ng1263.
 150. ^  Nina, Jablonski (2004). "The evolution of human skin and skin color". Annual Review of Anthropology. 33: 585–623. doi:
      10.1146/annurev.anthro.33.070203.143955.
 151. ^  Rogers, Alan R.; Iltis, David; Wooding, Stephen (2004). "Genetic variation at the MC1R locus and the time since loss of
      human body hair". Current Anthropology. 45  (1): 105–08. doi:10.1086/381006.
 152. ^  Jablonski, N.G. & Chaplin, G. (2000). The evolution of human skin coloration  (pdf), 'Journal of Human Evolution 39:
      57–106.
 153. ^  Harding RM, Healy E, Ray AJ, et al. (April 2000). "Evidence for variable selective pressures at MC1R". Am. J. Hum. Genet.
       66  (4): 1351–61. doi:10.1086/302863. PMC1288200. PMID10733465.
 154. ^  Robin, Ashley (1991). Biological Perspectives on Human Pigmentation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 155. ^ a  b  Muehlenbein, Michael (2010). Human Evolutionary Biology. Cambridge University Press. pp. 192–213.
 156. ^  "Journey of Mankind". Peopling of the World. Bradshaw Foundation. Retrieved 10 August  2013.
 157. ^  Birke, Lydia. The Gender and Science Reader ed. Muriel Lederman and Ingrid Bartsch. New York, Routledge, 2001. 306–22
 158. ^  Gustafsson A, Lindenfors P (2004). "Human size evolution: no allometric relationship between male and female stature". 
      Journal of Human Evolution. 47  (4): 253–66. doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2004.07.004. PMID15454336.
 159. ^  Dominance and the evolution of sexual dimorphism in human voice pitch  Puts, David Andrew and Gaulin, Steven J.C and
      Verdolini, Katherine; Evolution and Human Behavior, ISSN1090-5138, 2006, Volume 27, Issue 4, pp. 283–96
 160. ^  "Ogden et al (2004). Mean Body Weight, Height, and Body Mass Index, United States 1960–2002 ''Advance Data from Vital
      and
      Health Statistics'', Number 347, October 27, 2004."  (PDF). Retrieved 2013-07-27.
 161. ^  "Gender Differences in Endurance Performance and Training". Archived from the original  on 2010-01-27.
 162. ^  Miller, AE; MacDougall, JD; Tarnopolsky, MA; Sale, DG (1993). "Gender differences in strength and muscle fiber
      characteristics". European journal of applied physiology and occupational physiology. 66  (3): 254–62. doi:
      10.1007/BF00235103. PMID8477683.
 163. ^  "Women nose ahead in smell tests". BBC News. 2002-02-04. Retrieved 2010-05-23.
 164. ^  "Study Reveals Reason Women Are More Sensitive To Pain Than Men". Sciencedaily.com. 2005-10-25. Retrieved 2013-07-27.
 165. ^  Gender, women, and health  Reports from WHO 2002–2005
 166. ^ a  b  Alfred Glucksman (1981). Sexual Dimorphism in Human and Mammalian Biology and Pathology. Academic Press. pp. 66–75. 
      ISBN978-0-12-286960-0. OCLC7831448.
 167. ^  Jo Durden-Smith; Diane deSimone (1983). Sex and the Brain. New York: Arbor House. ISBN978-0-87795-484-2.
 168. ^  Gersh, Eileen S.; Gersh, Isidore (1981). Biology of Women. Baltimore: University Park Press (original from the University
      of Michigan). ISBN978-0-8391-1622-6.
 169. ^  Jay H. Stein (1987). Internal Medicine  (2nd ed.). Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN978-0-316-81236-8.
 170. ^  M. McLaughlin; T. Shryer (8 August 1988). "Men vs women: the new debate over sex differences". U.S. News & World Report:
      50–58.
 171. ^  B. S. McEwen (1981). "Neural gonadal steroid actions". Science. 211  (4488): 1303–11. Bibcode:1981Sci...211.1303M. doi:
      10.1126/science.6259728. PMID6259728.
 172. ^  Martin Daly; Margo Wilson (1996). "Evolutionary psychology and marital conflict". In David M. Buss  & Neil M. Malamuth. 
      Sex, Power, Conflict: Evolutionary and Feminist Perspectives. Oxford University Press. p. 13. ISBN978-0-19-510357-1.
 173. ^  Christopher Ryan; Cacilda Jethá (2010). Sex at Dawn: The Prehistoric Origins of Modern Sexuality. Harper. ISBN
      978-0-06-170780-3.
 174. ^  "The Science Behind the Human Genome Project". Human Genome Project. US Department of Energy. Retrieved 6 January  2013. 
      Almost all (99.9%) nucleotide bases are exactly the same in all people.
 175. ^  O'Neil, Dennis. "Ethnicity and Race: Overview". Palomar College. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 176. ^  "Genetic - Understanding Human Genetic Variation". Human Genetic Variation. National Institute of Health (NIH). Retrieved
       13 December  2013. In fact, research results consistently demonstrate that about 85 percent of all human genetic variation
      exists within human populations, whereas about only 15 percent of variation exists between populations.
 177. ^ a  b  Goodman, Alan. "Interview with Alan Goodman". Race Power of and Illusion. PBS. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 178. ^  Marks, J. (2010) Ten facts about human variation. In: Human Evolutionary Biology, edited by M. Muehlenbein. New York:
      Cambridge University Press [1]
 179. ^  Jorde, L.; Watkins, W; Bamshad, M; Dixon, M; Ricker, C.; Seielstad, M.; Batzer, M. (2000). "The distribution of human
      genetic diversity: a comparison of mitochondrial, autosomal, and Y-chromosome data". American Journal of Human Genetics. 66 
      (3): 979–88. doi:10.1086/302825. PMC1288178. PMID10712212.
 180. ^  "New Research Proves Single Origin Of Humans In Africa". Science Daily. 19 July 2007. Retrieved 2011-09-05.
 181. ^  Manica, A; Amos, W; Balloux, F; Hanihara, T (2007). "The effect of ancient population bottlenecks on human phenotypic
      variation". Nature. 448  (7151): 346–48. Bibcode:2007Natur.448..346M. doi:10.1038/nature05951. PMC1978547. PMID17637668.
 182. ^  O'Neil, Dennis. "Adapting to High Altitude". Human Biological Adaptability. Palomar College. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 183. ^  O'Neil, Dennis. "Overview". Human Biological Adaptability. Palomar College. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 184. ^ a  b  O'Neil, Dennis. "Models of Classification". Modern Human Variation. Palomar College. Archived from the original  on
      6 January 2013. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 185. ^ a  b  c  Marks, Jonathan. "Interview with Jonathan Marks". Race - The Power of an Illusion. PBS. Retrieved 6 January  2013
      .
 186. ^ a  b  Goodman, Alan. "Background Readings". Race – Power of an Illusion. PBS. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 187. ^  Nina, Jablonski (2004). "The evolution of human skin and skin color". Annual Review of Anthropology. 33: 585–623. doi:
      10.1146/annurev.anthro.33.070203.143955. genetic evidence [demonstrate] that strong levels of natural selection acted about
      1.2 mya to produce darkly pigmented skin in early members of the genus Homo
 188. ^  Bower, C.; Stanley (1992). "The role of nutritional factors in the aetiology of neural tube defects". Journal of
      Paediatrics and Child Health. 28  (1): 12–16. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1754.1992.tb02610.x. PMID1554510.
 189. ^  O'Neil, Dennis. "Overview". Modern Human Variation. Palomar College. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 190. ^  Wilson, James F.; Weale, Michael E.; Smith, Alice C.; Gratrix, Fiona; Fletcher, Benjamin; Thomas, Mark G.; Bradman, Neil;
      Goldstein, David B. (2001). "Population genetic structure of variable drug response". Nature Genetics. 29  (3): 265–69. doi:
      
      10.1038/ng761. PMID11685208. 62% of the Ethiopians fall in the ﬁrst cluster, which encompasses the majority of the Jews,
      Norwegians and Armenians, indicating that placement of these individuals in a ‘Black’ cluster would be an inaccurate
      reﬂection of the genetic structure. Only 24% of the Ethiopians are placed in the cluster with the Bantu
 191. ^  Liu, James J.Y. The Chinese Knight Errant. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1967 ISBN 0-226-48688-5.
 192. ^  Iqbal, Saadia. "A New Light on Skin Color". National Geographic Magazine. Retrieved 6 January  2013.
 193. ^ a  b  Keita, S O Y; Kittles, R A; Royal, C D M; Bonney, G E; Furbert-Harris, P; Dunston, G M; Rotimi, C N (2004).
      "Conceptualizing human variation". Nature Genetics. 36  (11 Suppl): S17–20. doi:10.1038/ng1455. PMID15507998.
 194. ^  "Census, race and science". Nature Genetics. 24: 97–98. 2000. doi:10.1038/72884. That race (...) is not a scientific term
      is generally agreed upon by scientists—and a message that cannot be repeated often enough.
 195. ^  Harrison, Guy (2010). Race and Reality. Amherst: Prometheus Books. Race is a poor empirical description of the patterns
      of difference that we encounter within our species. The billions of humans alive today simply do not fit into neat and tidy
      biological boxes called races. Science has proven this conclusively. The concept of race (...) is not scientific and goes
      against what is known about our ever-changing and complex biological diversity.
 196. ^  Roberts, Dorothy (2011). Fatal Invention. London, New York: The New Press. The genetic differences that exist among
      populations are characterized by gradual changes across geographic regions, not sharp, categorical distinctions. Groups of
      people across the globe have varying frequencies of polymorphic genes, which are genes with any of several differing
      nucleotide sequences. There is no such thing as a set of genes that belongs exclusively to one group and not to another. The
      clinal, gradually changing nature of geographic genetic difference is complicated further by the migration and mixing that
      human groups have engaged in since prehistory. Genetic studies have substantiated the absence of clear biological borders;
      thus the term "race" is rarely used in scientific terminology, either in biological anthropology and in human genetics. Race
      has no genetic or biological basis. Human beings do not fit the zoological definition of race. Race is not a biological
      category that is politically charged. It is a political category that has been disguised as a biological one.
 197. ^  Goodman, Alan. "Interview with Alan Goodman". Race Power of and Illusion. PBS. Retrieved 6 January  2013. There's no
      biological basis for race. And that is in the facts of biology, the facts of non-concordance, the facts of continuous
      variation, the recentness of our evolution, the way that we all commingle and come together, and how genes flow. (...)
      There's no generalizability to race. There is no center there (...). It's fluid.
 198. ^  Steve Olson, Mapping Human History: Discovering the Past Through Our Genes, Boston, 2002
 199. ^  "Race – The Power of an Illusion". PBS. Retrieved 2 January  2013.
 200. ^  Jablonski, Nina (2004). "The evolution of human skin and skin color". Annual Review of Anthropology. 33: 585–623. doi:
      10.1146/annurev.anthro.33.070203.143955.
 201. ^  Palmié, Stephan (May 2007). "Genomics, divination, 'racecraft'". American Ethnologist. 34: 205–22. doi:
      10.1525/ae.2007.34.2.205.
 202. ^  3-D Brain Anatomy, The Secret Life of the Brain, Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved April 3, 2005.
 203. ^  Grandner, Michael A.; Patel, Nirav P.; Gehrman, Philip R.; Perlis, Michael L.; Pack, Allan I. (2010). "Problems
      associated with short sleep: bridging the gap between laboratory and epidemiological studies". Sleep Medicine Reviews. 14 
      (4): 239–47. doi:10.1016/j.smrv.2009.08.001. PMC2888649. PMID19896872.
 204. ^  P. Rochat (30 October 1995). The Self in Infancy: Theory and Research. Elsevier. p. 4. ISBN978-0-08-054263-8. Retrieved 
      28 March  2016.
 205. ^  Jack Palmer. "Consciousness and the Symbolic Universe". Retrieved March 17,  2006.
 206. ^  Ned Block: On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness  in: The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1995.
 207. ^  Haviland, Wiliam A.; Prins, Harald E.L.; McBride, Bunny; Walrath, Dana (2010). Cultural Anthropology: The Human Challenge
      . Belmont, California: Wadsworth/Cengage Learning. p. 82. ISBN978-0-495-81082-7.
 208. ^  MobileReference (15 December 2009). The Illustrated Encyclopedia of North American Mammals. MobileReference. p. 601.
      Retrieved 10 August  2013.
 209. ^  Buss, David M. (2003). The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating. Revised Edition. New York, New York: Basic
      Books. ISBN978-0-465-00802-5.
 210. ^ a  b  "Demographic Overview – World". International Data Base. U.S. Census Bureau. July 2015. Retrieved May 30,  2016.
 211. ^  "World". The World Factbook. CIA. May 17, 2016. Retrieved May 30,  2016.
 212. ^  "Statistical Summaries". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2011-12-10.
 213. ^  "CIA – The World Factbook". Cia.gov. Retrieved 2011-12-10.
 214. ^  Comrie, Bernard; Polinsky, Maria; Matthews, Stephen (1996). The Atlas of Languages: The Origin and Development of
      Languages Throughout the World. New York, New York: Facts on File. pp. 13–15. ISBN978-0-8160-3388-1.
 215. ^  J. Hutchinson & A.D. Smith (eds.), Oxford readers: Ethnicity  (Oxford 1996), "Introduction"[page needed]
 216. ^  Smith, Anthony D. (1999) Myths and Memories of the Nation. Oxford University Press. pp. 4–7
 217. ^  Banton, Michael (2007). "Max Weber on 'ethnic communities': a critique". Nations and Nationalism. 13  (1): 19–35. doi:
      10.1111/j.1469-8129.2007.00271.x.
 218. ^  Delanty,Gerard & Krishan Kumar (2006) The SAGE Handbook of Nations and Nationalism. SAGE. ISBN 1412901014  p. 171
 219. ^  Ronald Cohen 1978 "Ethnicity: Problem and Focus in Anthropology" in Annual Review of Anthropology  7: 383 Palo Alto:
      Stanford University Press
 220. ^  Thomas Hylland Eriksen  (1993) Ethnicity and Nationalism: Anthropological Perspectives. London: Pluto Press[page needed]
 221. ^  Max Weber's definition of the modern state 1918, by Max Weber, 1918. Retrieved March 17, 2006.
 222. ^  Ferguson, Niall. "The Next War of the World." Foreign Affairs, Sep/Oct 2006
 223. ^  Clark, J.D.; de Heinzelin, J.; Schick, K.D.; et al. (1994). "African Homo erectus: old radiometric ages and young Oldowan
      assemblages in the Middle Awash Valley, Ethiopia". Science. 264  (5167): 1907–10. doi:10.1126/science.8009220. PMID8009220.
 224. ^  Kvavadze E, Bar-Yosef O, Belfer-Cohen A, Boaretto E, Jakeli N, Matskevich Z, Meshveliani T (2009). "30,000-year-old wild
      flax fibers". Science. 325  (5946): 1359. doi:10.1126/science.1175404. PMID19745144.
 225. ^ a  b  Margo DeMello (2007). Encyclopedia of Body Adornment. ABC-CLIO. pp. 17–. ISBN978-0-313-33695-9. Retrieved 6 April 
      2012.
 226. ^  "Evolutionary Religious Studies: A New Field of Scientific Inquiry".
 227. ^  Boyer, Pascal (2008). "Being human: Religion: bound to believe?". Nature. 455  (7216): 1038–39. doi:10.1038/4551038a. 
      PMID18948934.
 228. ^  Emmons, Robert A.; Paloutzian, Raymond F. (2003). "The psychology of religion". Annual Review of Psychology. 54  (1):
      377–402. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.54.101601.145024. PMID12171998.
 229. ^  Hall, Daniel E.; Meador, Keith G.; Koenig, Harold G. (2008). "Measuring religiousness in health research: review and
      critique". Journal of Religion and Health. 47  (2): 134–63. doi:10.1007/s10943-008-9165-2. PMID19105008.

FURTHER READING
 * Freeman, Scott; Jon C. Herron (2007). Evolutionary Analysis  (4th ed.). Pearson Education, Inc. ISBN 0-13-227584-8. Pages
   757–761.

EXTERNAL LINKS
Find more aboutHumansat Wikipedia's sister projects * Definitions  from Wiktionary
 * Media  from Commons
 * Quotations  from Wikiquote
 * Taxonomy  from Wikispecies

 * Archaeology Info
 * Homo sapiens – The Smithsonian Institution's Human Origins Program
 * Homo sapiens Linnaeus, 1758  at the Encyclopedia of Life
 * View the human genome  on Ensembl
 * Human Timeline (Interactive)  – Smithsonian, National Museum of Natural History  (August 2016).

Listen to this article (4 parts)· (info)Part 1 • Part 2 • Part 3 • Part 4This audio file was created from a revision of the "Human
" article dated 2013-03-16, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)More spoken articles * v
 * t
 * e

Human evolutionHomininae * Sivapithecus
 * Ardipithecus
 * Kenyanthropus
 * Orrorin
 * Sahelanthropus
 * Chimpanzee–human last common ancestor

AustralopithecinesAustralopithecus * A. afarensis
 * A. africanus
 * A. anamensis
 * A. bahrelghazali
 * A. deyiremeda
 * A. garhi
 * A. sediba

Paranthropus * P. aethiopicus
 * P. boisei
 * P. robustus

Humans and
proto-humans * Archaic humans
 * H. ergaster
 * H. gautengensis
 * H. habilis
 * H. rudolfensis
 * H. naledi

Homo erectus * H. e. erectus
 * H. e. georgicus
 * H. e. lantianensis
 * H. e. nankinensis
 * H. e. palaeojavanicus
 * H. e. pekinensis
 * H. e. soloensis
 * H. e. tautavelensis
 * H. e. yuanmouensis

 * Callao Man
 * Denisova hominin
 * H. antecessor
 * H. cepranensis
 * H. floresiensis
 * H. heidelbergensis
 * H. helmei
 * H. neanderthalensis
 * H. rhodesiensis
 * Penghu 1
 * Red Deer Cave people

Homo sapiens  (human) * Cro-Magnon
 * H. s. idaltu
 * H. s. sapiens
 * Manot people

Related * Books
 * Genetics
 * List of fossils
 * Models * Multiregional origin
    * Recent African origin
   
   
 * Paleoanthropology
 * Timelines * Human evolution
    * Human prehistory
    * Human timeline
    * Life timeline
    * Nature timeline
   
   

Evolutionary biology portal * v
 * t
 * e

Prehistoric technology * Prehistory * timeline
    * outline
    * Stone Age
    * subdivisions
    * New Stone Age
    * synoptic table
   
   
 * Technology * history
   
   

ToolsFarming * Neolithic Revolution * founder crops
    * New World crops
   
   
 * Ard / plough
 * Celt
 * Digging stick
 * Domestication
 * Goad
 * Irrigation
 * Secondary products
 * Sickle
 * Terracing

Food processing * Fire
 * Basket
 * Cooking * Earth oven
   
   
 * Granaries
 * Grinding slab
 * Ground stone
 * Hearth * Aşıklı Höyük
    * Qesem Cave
   
   
 * Manos
 * Metate
 * Mortar and pestle
 * Pottery
 * Quern-stone
 * Storage pit

Hunting * Arrow
 * Boomerang * throwing stick
   
   
 * Bow and arrow * history
   
   
 * Nets
 * Spear * Spear-thrower
    * baton
    * harpoon
    * woomera
    * Schöningen Spears
   
   

Projectile points * Arrowhead
 * Bare Island
 * Cascade
 * Clovis
 * Cresswell
 * Cumberland
 * Eden
 * Folsom
 * Lamoka
 * Manis Site
 * Plano
 * Transverse arrowhead

Systems * Game drive system * Buffalo jump
   
   

Toolmaking * Earliest toolmaking * Oldowan
    * Acheulean
    * Mousterian
   
   
 * Clovis culture
 * Cupstone
 * Fire hardening
 * Gravettian culture
 * Hafting
 * Hand axe * Grooves
   
   
 * Langdale axe industry
 * Levallois technique
 * Lithic core
 * Lithic reduction * analysis
    * debitage
    * flake
   
   
 * Lithic technology
 * Magdalenian culture
 * Metallurgy
 * Microblade technology
 * Mining
 * Prepared-core technique
 * Solutrean industry
 * Striking platform
 * Tool stone
 * Uniface
 * Yubetsu technique

Other tools * Adze
 * Awl * bone
   
   
 * Axe
 * Bannerstone
 * Blade * prismatic
   
   
 * Bone tool
 * Bow drill
 * Burin
 * Canoe * Oar
    * Pesse canoe
   
   
 * Chopper * tool
   
   
 * Cleaver
 * Denticulate tool
 * Fire plough
 * Fire-saw
 * Hammerstone
 * Knife
 * Microlith
 * Quern-stone
 * Racloir
 * Rope
 * Scraper * side
   
   
 * Stone tool
 * Tally stick
 * Weapons
 * Wheel * illustration
   
   

ArchitectureCeremonial * Göbekli Tepe
 * Kiva
 * Standing stones * megalith
    * row
    * Stonehenge
   
   
 * Pyramid

Dwellings * Neolithic architecture
 * British megalith architecture
 * Nordic megalith architecture
 * Burdei
 * Cave
 * Cliff dwelling
 * Dugout
 * Hut * Quiggly hole
   
   
 * Jacal
 * Longhouse
 * Mud brick * Mehrgarh
   
   
 * Neolithic long house
 * Pit-house
 * Pueblitos
 * Pueblo
 * Rock shelter * Blombos Cave
    * Abri de la Madeleine
    * Sibudu Cave
   
   
 * Stone roof
 * Roundhouse
 * Stilt house * Alp pile dwellings
   
   
 * Wattle and daub

Water management * Check dam
 * Cistern
 * Flush toilet
 * Reservoir
 * Water well

Other architecture * Archaeological features
 * Broch
 * Burnt mound * fulacht fiadh
   
   
 * Causewayed enclosure * Tor enclosure
   
   
 * Circular enclosure * Goseck
   
   
 * Cursus
 * Henge * Thornborough
   
   
 * Oldest buildings
 * Megalithic architectural elements
 * Midden
 * Timber circle
 * Timber trackway * Sweet Track
   
   

Arts  and cultureMaterial goods * Baskets
 * Beadwork
 * Beds
 * Chalcolithic
 * Clothing/textiles * timeline
   
   
 * Cosmetics
 * Glue
 * Hides * shoes
    * Ötzi
   
   
 * Jewelry * amber use
   
   
 * Mirrors
 * Pottery * Cardium
    * Grooved ware
    * Linear
    * Jōmon
    * Unstan ware
   
   
 * Sewing needle
 * Weaving
 * Wine * Winery
    * wine press
   
   

Prehistoric art * Art of the Upper Paleolithic
 * Art of the Middle Paleolithic * Blombos Cave
   
   
 * List of Stone Age art
 * Bird stone
 * Bradshaw rock paintings
 * Cairn
 * Carved Stone Balls
 * Cave paintings * painting
    * pigment
   
   
 * Cup and ring mark
 * Geoglyph
 * Golden hats
 * Guardian stones
 * Megalithic art
 * Petroform
 * Petroglyph
 * Petrosomatoglyph
 * Pictogram
 * Rock art * Stone carving
   
   
 * Sculpture
 * Statue menhir
 * Stone circle * list
    * British Isles and Brittany
   
   
 * Venus figurines

Burial * Burial mounds * Bowl barrow
    * Round barrow
   
   
 * Mound Builders culture * U.S. sites
   
   
 * Chamber tomb * Severn-Cotswold
   
   
 * Cist * Dartmoor kistvaens
   
   
 * Clava cairn
 * Court tomb
 * Cremation
 * Dolmen * Great dolmen
   
   
 * Funeral pyre
 * Gallery grave * transepted
    * wedge-shaped
   
   
 * Grave goods
 * Jar burial
 * Long barrow * unchambered
    * Grønsalen
   
   
 * Megalithic tomb
 * Mummy
 * Passage grave
 * Rectangular dolmen
 * Ring cairn
 * Simple dolmen
 * Stone box grave
 * Tor cairn
 * Tumulus
 * Unchambered long cairn

Other cultural * Astronomy * sites
    * lunar calendar
   
   
 * Behavioral modernity
 * Origin of language
 * Prehistoric medicine * trepanning
   
   
 * Evolutionary musicology * music archaeology
   
   
 * Prehistoric music * Alligator drum
    * flutes
    * Divje Babe flute
    * gudi
   
   
 * Prehistoric numerals
 * Origin of religion * Paleolithic religion
    * Prehistoric religion
    * Spiritual drug use
   
   
 * Prehistoric warfare
 * Symbols * symbolism
   
   

 * v
 * t
 * e

Extant species of family Hominidae (Great apes) * Kingdom: Animalia
 * Phylum: Chordata
 * Class: Mammalia
 * Order: Primates
 * Suborder: Haplorrhini

PonginaePongo
(Orangutans) * Bornean orangutan (P. pygmaeus)
 * Sumatran orangutan (P. abelii)

HomininaeGorilla
(Gorillas) * Western gorilla (G. gorilla)
 * Eastern gorilla (G. beringei)

Pan
(Chimpanzees) * Common chimpanzee (P. troglodytes)
 * Bonobo (P. paniscus)

Homo
(Humans) * Human (H. s. sapiens)

Category * v
 * t
 * e

Ape-related articlesApe species * Human  (Homo sapiens)
 * Chimpanzee  (Pan  spp.)
 * Bonobo  (Pan paniscus)
 * Common chimpanzee  (Pan troglodytes)
 * Gorilla  (Gorilla  spp.)
 * Western gorilla  (Gorilla gorilla)
 * Eastern gorilla  (Gorilla beringei)
 * Orangutan  (Pongo  spp.)
 * Bornean orangutan  (Pongo abelii)
 * Sumatran orangutan  (Pongo pygmaeus)
 * Gibbon  (family: Hylobatidae)

Ape study * Ape language
 * Dian Fossey
 * Birutė Galdikas
 * Jane Goodall
 * Chimpanzee genome project
 * Human genome project
 * Neanderthal genome project
 * Willie Smits
 * Lone Drøscher Nielsen
 * Ian Redmond
 * Elgin Center
 * Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary
 * Borneo Orangutan Survival

Legal and
social status * Personhood
 * Research ban
 * Kinshasa Declaration
 * Great Ape Project
 * Survival Project

See also * List of apes  (non-human)
 * Apes in space  (non-human)
 * Bushmeat
 * List of fictional primates  (non-human)
 * Human evolution
 * Mythic humanoids
 * Bigfoot
 * Yeren
 * Yeti
 * Great apes

Taxon identifiers * EoL:327955
 * GBIF:2436436
 * ITIS:180092
 * IUCN:136584
 * NCBI:9606
 * Fossilworks:83088
 * MSW:12100795

Authority control * GND: 4038639-9"Right" redirects here. For other uses, see Right (disambiguation).RightsTheoretical distinctions * Claim rights and liberty
   rights
 * Individual and group rights
 * Natural and legal rights
 * Negative and positive rights

Human rights * Civil and political
 * Economic, social and cultural
 * Three generations

Rights by beneficiary * Animals
 * Authors
 * Children
 * Consumers
 * Creditors
 * Elders
 * Fathers
 * Fetuses
 * Gun owners
 * Humans
 * Natives
 * Intersex
 * Kings
 * LGBT
 * Men
 * Minorities
 * Mothers
 * Patients
 * Plants
 * Prisoners
 * Students
 * Victims
 * Women
 * Workers
 * Youth
 * Disabled persons

Other groups of rights * Civil liberties
 * Digital
 * Linguistic
 * Property
 * Reproductive

 * v
 * t
 * e

Rights  are legal, social, or ethical principles  of freedom  or entitlement; that is, rights are the fundamental normative  rules
about what is allowed of people or owed to people, according to some legal system, social convention, or ethical theory.[1] 
Rights are of essential importance in such disciplines as law  and ethics, especially theories of justice  and deontology.

Rights are often considered fundamental to civilization, being regarded as established pillars of society  and culture,[2]  and
the history of social conflicts  can be found in the history of each right and its development. According to the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "rights structure the form of governments, the content of laws, and the shape of morality  as it is
currently perceived."[1]



DEFINITIONAL ISSUES
Rights are widely regarded as the basis of law, but what if laws are bad? Some theorists suggest civil disobedience  is, itself, a
 right, and it was advocated by thinkers such as Henry David Thoreau, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi.
There is considerable disagreement about what is meant precisely by the term rights. It has been used by different groups and
thinkers for different purposes, with different and sometimes opposing definitions, and the precise definition of this principle,
beyond having something to do with normative rules of some sort or another, is controversial.

One way to get an idea of the multiple understandings and senses of the term is to consider different ways it is used. Many
diverse things are claimed as rights:

“A right to life, a right to choose; a right to vote, to work, to strike; a right to one phone call, to dissolve parliament, to
operate a forklift, to asylum, to equal treatment before the law, to feel proud of what one has done; a right to exist, to
sentence an offender to death, to launch a nuclear first strike, to carry a concealed weapon, to a distinct genetic identity; a
right to believe one's own eyes, to pronounce the couple husband and wife, to be left alone, to go to hell in one's own way.[1]”
There are likewise diverse possible ways to categorize rights, such as:

“Who  is alleged to have the right: Children's rights, animal rights, workers' rights, states' rights, the rights of peoples. What
actions or states or objects  the asserted right pertains to: Rights of free expression, to pass judgment; rights of privacy, to
remain silent; property rights, bodily rights. Why  the rightholder (allegedly) has the right: Moral rights spring from moral
reasons, legal rights derive from the laws of the society, customary rights are aspects of local customs. How the asserted right
can be affected  by the rightholder's actions: The inalienable right to life, the forfeitable right to liberty, and the waivable
right that a promise be kept.[1]”There has been considerable debate about what this term means within the academic community,
particularly within fields such as philosophy, law, deontology, logic, political science, and religion.

NATURAL RIGHTS VERSUS LEGAL RIGHTS
According to some views, certain rights derive from God  or NatureMain article: Natural and legal rights * Natural rights  are rights which are "natural" in the sense of "not artificial, not man-made", as in rights deriving from 
   deontic logic, from human nature, or from the edicts of a god. They are universal; that is, they apply to all people, and do
   not derive from the laws of any specific society. They exist necessarily, inhere in every individual, and can't be taken away.
   For example, it has been argued that humans have a natural right to life. These are sometimes called moral rights  or 
   inalienable rights.
 * Legal rights, in contrast, are based on a society's customs, laws, statutes  or actions by legislatures. An example of a legal
   right is the right to vote  of citizens. Citizenship, itself, is often considered as the basis for having legal rights, and has
   been defined as the "right to have rights". Legal rights are sometimes called civil rights  or statutory rights  and are
   culturally and politically relative  since they depend on a specific societal context to have meaning.

Some thinkers see rights in only one sense while others accept that both senses have a measure of validity. There has been
considerable philosophical debate about these senses throughout history. For example, Jeremy Bentham  believed that legal rights
were the essence of rights, and he denied the existence of natural rights; whereas Thomas Aquinas  held that rights purported by 
positive law  but not grounded in natural law  were not properly rights at all, but only a facade or pretense of rights.8

CLAIM RIGHTS VERSUS LIBERTY RIGHTS
A deed  is an example of a claim right  in the sense that it asserts a right  to own land. This particular deed dates back to
1273.Main article: Claim rights and liberty rights * A claim right  is a right which entails that another person has a duty to the right-holder. Somebody else must do or refrain
   from doing something to or for the claim holder, such as perform a service or supply a product for him or her; that is, he or
   she has a claim  to that service or product (another term is thing in action).[3]  In logic, this idea can be expressed as:
   "Person A  has a claim that person B  do something if and only if B  has a duty to A  to do that something." Every claim-right
   entails that some other duty-bearer must do some duty for the claim to be satisfied. This duty can be to act or to refrain from
   acting. For example, many jurisdictions recognize broad claim rights to things like "life, liberty, and property"; these rights
   impose an obligation upon others not  to assault or restrain a person, or use their property, without the claim-holder's
   permission. Likewise, in jurisdictions where social welfare services are provided, citizens have legal claim rights to be
   provided with those services.[citation needed]
 * A liberty right  or privilege, in contrast, is simply a freedom or permission for the right-holder to do something, and there
   are no obligations  on other parties to do or not do anything.[3]  This can be expressed in logic as: "Person A  has a
   privilege to do something if and only if A  has no duty not to do that something." For example, if a person has a legal liberty
   right to free speech, that merely means that it is not legally forbidden for them to speak freely: it does not  mean that
   anyone has to help enable their speech, or to listen to their speech; or even, per se, refrain from stopping them from
   speaking, though other  rights, such as the claim right to be free from assault, may severely limit what others can do to stop
   them.

Liberty rights and claim rights are the inverse of one another: a person has a liberty right permitting him to do something only
if there is no other person who has a claim right forbidding him from doing so. Likewise, if a person has a claim right against
someone else, then that other person's liberty is limited. For example, a person has a liberty right  to walk down a sidewalk and
can decide freely whether or not to do so, since there is no obligation either to do so or to refrain from doing so. But
pedestrians may have an obligation not to walk on certain lands, such as other people's private property, to which those other
people have a claim right. So a person's liberty right  of walking extends precisely to the point where another's claim right 
limits his or her freedom.

POSITIVE RIGHTS VERSUS NEGATIVE RIGHTS
Main article: Negative and positive rightsIn one sense, a right is a permission to do something or an entitlement to a specific
service or treatment from others, and these rights have been called positive rights. However, in another sense, rights may allow
or require inaction, and these are called negative rights; they permit or require doing nothing. For example, in some democracies
e.g. the US, citizens have the positive right  to vote and they have the negative right  to not vote; people can choose not to
vote in a given election without punishment. In other democracies e.g. Australia, however, citizens have a positive right to vote
but they don't have a negative right to not vote, since voting is compulsory. Accordingly:

 * Positive rights  are permissions to do things, or entitlements to be done unto. One example of a positive right is the
   purported "right to welfare."[4]
 * Negative rights  are permissions not to do things, or entitlements to be left alone. Often the distinction is invoked by 
   libertarians  who think of a negative right  as an entitlement to non-interference such as a right against being assaulted.[4]

Though similarly named, positive and negative rights should not be confused with active rights  (which encompass "privileges" and
"powers") and passive rights  (which encompass "claims" and "immunities").

INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS VERSUS GROUP RIGHTS
Main article: Individual and group rightsThe general concept of rights is that they are possessed by individuals in the sense that
they are permissions and entitlements to do things which other persons, or which governments or authorities, can not infringe.
This is the understanding of people such as the author Ayn Rand  who argued that only individuals have rights, according to her
philosophy known as Objectivism.[5]  However, others have argued that there are situations in which a group of persons is thought
to have rights, or group rights. Accordingly:

 * Individual rights  are rights held by individual people regardless of their group membership or lack thereof.

Do groups have rights? Some argue that when soldiers bond in combat, the group becomes like an organism in itself and has rights 
which trump the rights of any individual soldier. * Group rights  have been argued to exist when a group is seen as more than a mere composite or assembly of separate individuals
   but an entity in its own right. In other words, it's possible to see a group as a distinct being in and of itself; it's akin to
   an enlarged individual, a corporate body, which has a distinct will and power of action and can be thought of as having rights.
   For example, a platoon of soldiers in combat  can be thought of as a distinct group, since individual members are willing to
   risk their lives for the survival of the group, and therefore the group can be conceived as having a "right" which is superior
   to that of any individual member; for example, a soldier who disobeys an officer can be punished, perhaps even killed, for a
   breach of obedience. But there is another sense of group rights in which people who are members of a group can be thought of as
   having specific individual rights because of their membership in a group. In this sense, the set of rights which
   individuals-as-group-members have is expanded because of their membership in a group. For example, workers who are members of a
   group such as a labor union  can be thought of as having expanded individual rights because of their membership in the labor
   union, such as the rights to specific working conditions or wages. As expected, there is sometimes considerable disagreement
   about what exactly is meant by the term "group" as well as by the term "group rights."[citation needed]

There can be tension between individual and group rights. A classic instance in which group and individual rights clash is
conflicts between unions and their members. For example, individual members of a union may wish a wage higher than the
union-negotiated wage, but are prevented from making further requests; in a so-called closed shop  which has a union security
agreement, only the union has a right  to decide matters for the individual union members such as wage rates. So, do the supposed
"individual rights" of the workers prevail about the proper wage? Or do the "group rights" of the union regarding the proper wage
prevail? Clearly this is a source of tension.

The Austrian School of Economics  holds that only individuals think, feel, and act whether or not members of any abstract group.
The society should thus according to economists of the school be analyzed starting from the individual. This methodology is called
 methodological individualism  and is used by the economists to justify individual rights.

OTHER SENSES
Other distinctions between rights draw more on historical association or family resemblance  than on precise philosophical
distinctions. These include the distinction between civil and political rights  and economic, social and cultural rights, between
which the articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights  are often divided. Another conception of rights groups them into 
three generations. These distinctions have much overlap with that between negative and positive rights, as well as between 
individual rights  and group rights, but these groupings are not entirely coextensive.

RIGHTS AND POLITICS
In the United States, persons who are going to be questioned by police when they are in police custody must be read their "Miranda
rights". The Miranda warning  requires police officers to read a statement to people being arrested which informs them that they
have certain rights, such as the right to remain silent and the right to have an attorney.Rights are often included in the
foundational questions that governments and politics have been designed to deal with. Often the development of these
socio-political institutions have formed a dialectical relationship with rights.

Rights about particular issues, or the rights of particular groups, are often areas of special concern. Often these concerns arise
when rights come into conflict with other legal or moral issues, sometimes even other rights. Issues of concern have historically
included labor rights, LGBT rights, reproductive rights, disability rights, patient rights  and prisoners' rights. With increasing
 monitoring  and the information society, information rights, such as the right to privacy  are becoming more important.

Some examples of groups whose rights are of particular concern include animals,[6]  and amongst humans, groups such as children[7] 
 and youth, parents  (both mothers  and fathers), and men  and women.[8]

Accordingly, politics plays an important role in developing or recognizing the above rights, and the discussion about which
behaviors are included as "rights" is an ongoing political topic of importance. The concept of rights varies with political
orientation. Positive rights such as a "right to medical care" are emphasized more often by left-leaning thinkers, while
right-leaning thinkers place more emphasis on negative rights such as the "right to a fair trial".

Further, the term equality  which is often bound up with the meaning of "rights" often depends on one's political orientation. 
Conservatives  and libertarians  and advocates of free markets  often identify equality with equality of opportunity, and want
equal and fair rules in the process of making things, while agreeing that sometimes these fair rules lead to unequal outcomes. In
contrast, socialists  often identify equality with equality of outcome  and see fairness when people have equal amounts of goods
and services, and therefore think that people have a right to equal portions of necessities such as health care  or economic
assistance  or housing.[9]

RIGHTS AND PHILOSOPHY
In philosophy, meta-ethics  is the branch of ethics that seeks to understand the nature of ethical properties, statements,
attitudes, and judgments. Meta-ethics is one of the three branches of ethics generally recognized by philosophers, the others
being normative ethics  and applied ethics.

While normative ethics addresses such questions as "What should one do?", thus endorsing some ethical evaluations and rejecting
others, meta-ethics addresses questions such as "What is  goodness?" and "How can we tell what is good from what is bad?", seeking
to understand the nature of ethical properties and evaluations.

Rights ethics is an answer to the meta-ethical question of what normative ethics is concerned with. (Metaethics also includes a
group of questions about how ethics comes to be known, true, etc. which is not directly addressed by rights ethics). Rights ethics
holds that normative ethics is concerned with rights. Alternative metaethical theories are that ethics is concerned with one of
the following

 * Duties (deontology)
 * Value  (Axiology)
 * Virtue (virtue ethics)
 * Consequences (consequentialism, e.g. utilitarianism)

Rights ethics has had considerable influence on political and social thinking. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights  gives
some concrete examples of widely accepted rights.

CRITICISM
Some philosophers have criticised rights as ontologically  dubious entities. For instance, although in favour of the extension of 
individual legal rights, the utilitarian  philosopher Jeremy Bentham  opposed the idea of natural law  and natural rights, calling
them "nonsense upon stilts".[10]  Further, one can question the ability of rights to actually bring about justice for all.

ETYMOLOGY
The Modern English  word right  derives from Old English  riht  or reht, in turn from Proto-Germanic  *riχtaz  meaning "right" or
"direct", and ultimately from Proto-Indo-European  *reg-to-  meaning "having moved in a straight line", in turn from *(o)reg'(a)- 
meaning "to straighten or direct".[11]  In several different Indo-European languages, a single word derived from the same root
means both "right" and "law", such as French droit,[12]  Spanish derecho,[13]  German Recht.[14]  and Italian diritto.

Many other words related to normative or regulatory concepts derive from this same root, including correct,[15]  regulate,[16] 
and rex[17]  (meaning "king"), whence regal[18]  and thence royal.[19]  Likewise many more geometric terms derive from this same
root, such as erect  (as in "upright"),[20]  rectangle  (literally "right angle"),[21]  straight[22]  and stretch.[23]  Like right
, the English words rule[24]  and ruler,[25]  deriving still from the same root, have both normative or regulatory and geometric
meanings (e.g. a ruler as in a king, or a ruler as in a straightedge).

Several other roots have similar normative and geometric descendants, such as Latin norma,[26]  whence norm,[27]  normal,[28]  and
 normative[29]  itself, and also geometric concepts such as normal vectors; and likewise Greek ortho[30]  and Latin ordo,[31] 
meaning either "right" or "correct" (as in orthodox, meaning "correct opinion"[32]) or "straight" or "perpendicular" (as in 
orthogonal, meaning "perpendicular angle"[33]), and thence order,[34]  ordinary,[35]  etc.

HISTORY OF RIGHTS
See also: History of human rights
The Magna Carta  or "Great Charter" was one of England's first documents containing commitments by a king  to his people to
respect certain legal  rights. It reduced the power of the monarch.
The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen  in 1789 in France.The specific enumeration of rights has differed greatly
in different periods of history. In many cases, the system of rights promulgated by one group has come into sharp and bitter
conflict with that of other groups. In the political sphere, a place in which rights have historically been an important issue,
constitutional provisions of various states sometimes address the question of who has what legal rights.

Historically, many notions of rights were authoritarian  and hierarchical, with different people granted different rights, and
some having more rights than others. For instance, the right of a father to respected from his son did not indicate a right from
the son to receive a return from that respect; and the divine right of kings, which permitted absolute power over subjects, did
not leave a lot of room for many rights for the subjects themselves.[36]

In contrast, modern conceptions of rights often emphasize liberty  and equality  as among the most important aspects of rights,
for example in the American Revolution  and the French Revolution.

Important documents in the political history  of rights include:

 * The Constitution of Medina  (622 AD; Arabia) instituted a number of rights for the Muslim, Jewish and pagan communities of
   Medina,[37]  establishing freedom of worship for non-Muslims the security of women, a system for granting protection to
   individuals, and a judicial system.
 * The Magna Carta  (1215; England) required the King of England  to renounce certain rights and respect certain legal procedures,
   and to accept that the will of the king could be bound by law, after King John promised his barons he would follow the "law of
   the land". While Magna Carta was originally a set of rules that the king had to follow, and mainly protected the property of
   aristocratic landowners, today the Magna Carta is seen as the basis of certain rights for ordinary people, such as the right of
   due process.[38]
 * The Declaration of Arbroath  (1320; Scotland) established the right of the people to choose a head of state (see Popular
   sovereignty).
 * The Henrician Articles  (1573; Poland-Lithuania) or King Henry's Articles were a permanent contract that stated the fundamental
   principles of governance and constitutional law in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, including the rights of the nobility to
   elect the king, to meet in parliament whose approval was required to levy taxes and declare war or peace, to religious liberty
   and the right to rebel in case the king transgressed against the laws of the republic or the rights of the nobility.
 * The Bill of Rights  (1689; England) declared that Englishmen, as embodied by Parliament, possess certain civil and political
   rights; the Claim of Right  (1689; Scotland) was similar but distinct.
 * The Virginia Declaration of Rights  (1776) by George Mason  declared the inherent natural rights and separation of powers.
 * United States Declaration of Independence  (1776) succinctly defined the rights of man as including, but not limited to, "
   Life,
   liberty, and the pursuit of happiness" which later influenced "liberté, égalité, fraternité" (liberty, equality, fraternity) in
   France[39]  The phrase can also be found in Chapter III, Article 13 of the 1947 Constitution of Japan,[40]  and in President 
   Ho
   Chi Minh's 1945 declaration of independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.[41]  An alternative phrase "life, liberty
   and property", is found in the Declaration of Colonial Rights, a resolution of the First Continental Congress. Also, Article 3
   of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights  reads, "Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person."
 * The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen  (1789; France), one of the fundamental documents of the French
   Revolution, defined a set of individual rights and collective rights of the people.
 * The Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom  (1785; United States) Written by Thomas Jefferson  in 1779, the document asserted
   the right of man to form a personal relationship with God without interference by the state.
 * The United States Bill of Rights  (1789–1791; United States), the first ten amendments of the United States Constitution 
   specified rights of individuals in which government could not interfere, including the rights of free assembly, freedom of
   religion, trial by jury, and the right to keep and bear arms for self-defense.
 * The Universal Declaration of Human Rights  (1948) is an overarching set of standards by which governments, organisations and
   individuals would measure their behaviour towards each other.[citation needed]  The preamble declares that the "...recognition
   of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom
   , justice  and peace  in the world..."
 * The European Convention on Human Rights  (1950; Europe) was adopted under the auspices of the Council of Europe  to protect 
   human rights  and fundamental freedoms.
 * The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  (1966), a follow-up to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
   concerns civil and political rights.
 * The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  (1966), another follow-up to the Universal Declaration of
   Human Rights, concerns economic, social and cultural rights.
 * The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms  (1982; Canada) was created to protect the rights of Canadian  citizens from
   actions and policies of all levels of government.[citation needed]
 * The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union  (2000) is one of the most recent proposed legal instruments 
   concerning human rights.

SEE ALSO
Outline of rights

 * Contractual rights
 * Constitutionalism
 * Constitutional liberalism
 * Constitutional economics
 * Rule according to higher law
 * Deed
 * Droit
 * Equal rights (disambiguation), various meanings
 * Exclusive rights
 * Freedom
 * Freedom of religion
 * Freedom of speech
 * Freedom of the press

 * Fundamental Laws of England
 * History of citizenship
 * Inheritance
 * Jurisprudence
 * Law
 * Social contract
 * Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld
 * Right to food
 * Right to housing
 * Right to water
 * Right to an adequate standard of living
 * Right to health
 * Right to social security

Organisations:

 * Amnesty International
 * Human Rights Watch
 * United States Commission on Civil Rights

REFERENCES
 1.  ^ a  b  c  d  "Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy". Stanford University. July 9, 2007. Retrieved 2009-12-21. Rights dominate
     most modern understandings of what actions are proper and which institutions are just. Rights structure the forms of our
     governments, the contents of our laws, and the shape of morality as we perceive it. To accept a set of rights is to approve a
     distribution of freedom and authority, and so to endorse a certain view of what may, must, and must not be done.
 2.  ^  UN UDHR  Preamble: "Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of
     the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world..."
 3.  ^ a  b  Fagan, Andrew. "Human Rights". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy  http://www.iep.utm.edu/hum-rts/#SH3b
 4.  ^ a  b  "Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy". Stanford University. July 9, 2007. Retrieved 2009-12-21. A distinction between
     negative and positive rights is popular among some normative theorists, especially those with a bent toward libertarianism.
     The holder of a negative right is entitled to non-interference, while the holder of a positive right is entitled to provision
     of some good or service. A right against assault is a classic example of a negative right, while a right to welfare
     assistance is a prototypical positive right.
 5.  ^  Ayn Rand (2009-12-18). "The Virtue of Selfishness: Individual Rights". The Ayn Rand Lexicon. Retrieved 2009-12-18. 
     Individual rights are not subject to a public vote; a majority has no right to vote away the rights of a minority; the
     political function of rights is precisely to protect minorities from oppression by majorities (and the smallest minority on
     earth is the individual). see page 104. See also: Collectivized 'Rights
 6.  ^  Kate Pickert (Mar 9, 2009). "Undercover Animal-Rights Investigator". Time Magazine. Retrieved 2009-12-21. One of the most
     powerful tools animal-rights activists have is the video footage shot inside places like poorly run dog kennels,
     animal-testing facilities and factory farms, used as grim evidence of the brutality that can take place. But how do
     animal-rights crusaders actually get those videos?
 7.  ^  Victoria Burnett (July 26, 2007). "Human Rights Watch says migrant children are at risk in Canary Islands". The New York
     Times. Retrieved 2009-12-21. They must immediately come up with a plan to close these centers," Simone Troller, author of the
     report and a children's rights researcher for Human Rights Watch in Europe, said in a telephone interview. "While these
     centers continue to exist, we believe children continue to be at risk.
 8.  ^  "Soap Operas Boost Rights, Global Economist Says". NPR. October 21, 2009. Retrieved 2009-12-21. Many of these locally
     produced programs feature strong female characters. When Rede Globo began broadcasting in its native Brazil in 1965 the
     average woman had about six children — now the average woman has no children or one child.
 9.  ^  John E. Roemer (December 14, 2005). "Roemer on equality of opportunity". New Economist. Retrieved 2009-12-21. Equality of
     opportunity is to be contrasted with equality of outcome. While advocacy of the latter has been traditionally associated with
     a left-wing political philosophy, the former has been championed by conservative political philosophy. Equality of outcome
     fails to hold individuals responsible for imprudent actions that may, absent redress, reduce the values of the outcomes they
     enjoy, or for wise actions that would raise the value of the outcomes above the levels of others’. Equality of opportunity,
     in contrast, ‘levels the playing field,’ so that all have the potential to achieve the same outcomes; whether or not, in the
     event, they do, depends upon individual choice.
 10. ^  Harrison, Ross (1995). "Jeremy Bentham". In Honderich, Ted. The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University Press.
     pp. 85–88.  Also see Sweet, William (11 April 2001). "Jeremy Bentham". The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 7
     January  2011.
 11. ^  wikt:right
 12. ^  wikt:droit
 13. ^  wikt:derecho
 14. ^  wikt:recht
 15. ^  wikt:correct
 16. ^  wikt:regulate
 17. ^  wikt:rex#latin
 18. ^  wikt:regal
 19. ^  wikt:royal
 20. ^  wikt:erect
 21. ^  wikt:rectangle
 22. ^  wikt:straight
 23. ^  wikt:stretch
 24. ^  wikt:rule
 25. ^  wikt:ruler
 26. ^  wikt:norma#latin
 27. ^  wikt:norm
 28. ^  wikt:normal
 29. ^  wikt:normative
 30. ^  wikt:ortho
 31. ^  wikt:ordo
 32. ^  wikt:orthodox
 33. ^  wikt:orthogonal
 34. ^  wikt:order
 35. ^  wikt:ordinary
 36. ^  "Divine Right of Kings". BBC. 2007-10-11. Retrieved 2009-12-21. [...] the idea that a king was sacred, appointed by God
     and above the judgment of earthly powers [...] was called the Divine Right of Kings and it entered so powerfully into British
     culture during the 17th century that it shaped the pomp and circumstance of the Stuart monarchs, imbued the writing of
     Shakespeare and provoked the political thinking of Milton and Locke.
 37. ^  R. B. Serjeant, The Sunnah Jami'ah, pacts with the Yathrib Jews, and the Tahrim of Yathrib: Analysis and translation of
     the documents comprised in the so-called "Constitution of Medina".  Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies,
     University of London, Vol. 41, No. 1. (1978), page 4.
 38. ^  Lepore, Jill (April 20, 2015). "The Rule of History: Magna Carta, the Bill of Rights, and the hold of time.". Newyorker.
 39. ^  Dyck, Rand (2000). Canadian Politics: Critical Approaches (3rd edition). Thomas Nelson. ISBN978-0-17-616792-9.
 40. ^  http://history.hanover.edu/texts/1947con.html
 41. ^  http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1945vietnam.html

EXTERNAL LINKS
Look up right  in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.Wikiquote has quotations related to: Rights * Stanford Encyclopedia of
   Philosophy, article by Leif Wenar.
 * WikiEd - Teacher's Rights
 * International Freedom of
   Expression Exchange
 * Comparative Analysis of Human
   Rights

 * v
 * t
 * e

LibertyConcepts * Positive liberty
 * Negative liberty
 * Cognitive liberty
 * Social liberty
 * Rights
 * Free will
 * Moral responsibility
 * Goddess of Liberty

By type * Academic
 * Civil
 * Economic
 * Intellectual
 * Morphological
 * Political
 * Scientific

By right * Assembly
 * Association
 * Choice
 * Education
 * Information
 * Movement
 * Press
 * Religion
 * Public speech
 * Thought

 * v
 * t
 * e

Rights  theory * Natural and legal rights
 * Claim rights and liberty rights
 * Negative and positive rights
 * Individual and group rights

 * Natural law
 * Positive law
 * Sovereign states
 * Universal jurisdiction
 * Equality before the law
 * Social contract

 * v
 * t
 * e

Social  and political philosophyPhilosophers * Alinsky
 * Aristotle
 * Augustine
 * Aurobindo
 * Aquinas
 * Aron
 * Averroes
 * Azurmendi
 * Badiou
 * Bakunin
 * Baudrillard
 * Bauman
 * Benoist
 * Bentham
 * Berlin
 * Bonald
 * Bosanquet
 * Burke
 * Camus
 * Chanakya
 * Chomsky
 * Cicero
 * Comte
 * Confucius
 * Debord
 * Djilas
 * Durkheim
 * Engels
 * Foucault
 * Fourier
 * Franklin
 * Gandhi
 * Gehlen
 * Gentile
 * Al-Ghazali
 * Gramsci
 * Grotius
 * Habermas
 * Han Fei
 * Heidegger
 * Hobbes
 * Hume
 * Jefferson
 * Kant
 * Kierkegaard
 * Kirk
 * Kropotkin
 * Le Bon
 * Le Play
 * Leibniz
 * Locke
 * Luxemburg
 * Machiavelli
 * Maistre
 * Malebranche
 * Marcuse
 * Maritain
 * Marsilius
 * Marx
 * Mencius
 * Michels
 * Mill
 * Mises
 * Montesquieu
 * Möser
 * Mozi
 * Muhammad
 * Negri
 * Nietzsche
 * Nozick
 * Oakeshott
 * Ortega
 * Pareto
 * Pettit
 * Plamenatz
 * Plato
 * Polanyi
 * Popper
 * Rand
 * Rawls
 * Renan
 * Rothbard
 * Rousseau
 * Royce
 * Russell
 * Santayana
 * Sarkar
 * Sartre
 * Schmitt
 * Searle
 * Shang
 * Simonović
 * Smith
 * Socrates
 * Sombart
 * Spann
 * Spencer
 * Spinoza
 * Spirito
 * Stirner
 * Strauss
 * Taine
 * Taylor
 * Thoreau
 * Tocqueville
 * Vivekananda
 * Voltaire
 * Walzer
 * Weber
 * Žižek

Social theories * Vaisheshika
 * Anarchism
 * Authoritarianism
 * Collectivism
 * Communism
 * Communitarianism
 * Conflict theories
 * Confucianism
 * Consensus theory
 * Conservatism
 * Contractualism
 * Cosmopolitanism
 * Culturalism
 * Fascism
 * Feminist political theory
 * Gandhism
 * Individualism
 * Legalism
 * Liberalism
 * Libertarianism
 * Mohism
 * National liberalism
 * Republicanism
 * Social constructionism
 * Social constructivism
 * Social Darwinism
 * Social determinism
 * Socialism
 * Utilitarianism

Social concepts * Civil disobedience
 * Democracy
 * Four occupations
 * Justice
 * Law
 * Mandate of Heaven
 * Peace
 * Property
 * Revolution
 * Rights
 * Social contract
 * Society
 * War
 * more...

Related articles * Jurisprudence
 * Philosophy and economics
 * Philosophy of education
 * Philosophy of history
 * Philosophy of love
 * Philosophy of sex
 * Philosophy of social science
 * Political ethics
 * Social epistemology

 * Category
 * Portal
 * Task Force

 * v
 * t
 * e

EthicsTheories * Casuistry
 * Consequentialism
 * Deontology * Kantian ethics
   
   
 * Ethics of care
 * Existentialist ethics
 * Meta-ethics
 * Particularism
 * Pragmatic ethics
 * Role ethics
 * Virtue ethics

Concepts * Autonomy
 * Axiology
 * Belief
 * Conscience
 * Consent
 * Equality
 * Care
 * Free will
 * Good and evil
 * Happiness
 * Ideal
 * Justice
 * Morality
 * Norm
 * Freedom
 * Principles
 * Suffering or Pain
 * Stewardship
 * Sympathy
 * Trust
 * Value
 * Virtue
 * Wrong
 * full index...

Philosophers * Plato
 * Aristotle
 * Cicero
 * Confucius
 * Augustine of Hippo
 * Mencius
 * Mozi
 * Xunzi
 * Thomas Aquinas
 * Baruch Spinoza
 * David Hume
 * Immanuel Kant
 * Georg W. F. Hegel
 * Arthur Schopenhauer
 * Jeremy Bentham
 * John Stuart Mill
 * Søren Kierkegaard
 * Henry Sidgwick
 * Friedrich Nietzsche
 * G. E. Moore
 * Karl Barth
 * Paul Tillich
 * Dietrich Bonhoeffer
 * Philippa Foot
 * John Rawls
 * Bernard Williams
 * J. L. Mackie
 * G. E. M. Anscombe
 * William Frankena
 * Alasdair MacIntyre
 * R. M. Hare
 * Peter Singer
 * Derek Parfit
 * Thomas Nagel
 * Robert Merrihew Adams
 * Charles Taylor
 * Joxe Azurmendi
 * Christine Korsgaard
 * Martha Nussbaum
 * more...

Applied ethics * Bioethics
 * Business ethics
 * Discourse ethics
 * Environmental ethics
 * Legal ethics
 * Medical ethics
 * Nursing ethics
 * Professional ethics
 * Sexual ethics
 * Ethics of eating meat
 * Ethics of technology

Related articles * Christian ethics
 * Descriptive ethics
 * Ethics in religion
 * Evolutionary ethics
 * Feminist ethics
 * History of ethics
 * Ideology
 * Islamic ethics
 * Jewish ethics
 * Normative ethics
 * Philosophy of law
 * Political philosophy
 * Social philosophy

 * Portal
 * Category

 * v
 * t
 * e

JurisprudenceLegal theory * Critical legal studies
 * Comparative law
 * Economic analysis
 * International legal theory
 * Legal history
 * Philosophy of law
 * Sociology of law

Philosophers * Alexy
 * Allan
 * Amar
 * Aquinas
 * Aristotle
 * Austin
 * Beccaria
 * Bentham
 * Betti
 * Bickel
 * Blackstone
 * Bobbio
 * Bork
 * Cardozo
 * Castanheira Neves
 * Chafee
 * Coleman
 * Del Vecchio
 * Durkheim
 * Dworkin
 * Ehrlich
 * Feinberg
 * Fineman
 * Finnis
 * Frank
 * Fuller
 * Gardner
 * George
 * Green
 * Grisez
 * Grotius
 * Gurvitch
 * Habermas
 * Han
 * Hand
 * Hart
 * Hegel
 * Hobbes
 * Hohfeld
 * Holmes
 * Hägerström
 * Jellinek
 * Jhering
 * Kant
 * Kelsen
 * Köchler
 * Kramer
 * Llewellyn
 * Lombardía
 * Luhmann
 * Lundstedt
 * Lyons
 * MacCormick
 * Marx
 * Nussbaum
 * Olivecrona
 * Pashukanis
 * Perelman
 * Petrazycki
 * Pontes de Miranda
 * Posner
 * Pound
 * Puchta
 * Radbruch
 * Rawls
 * Raz
 * Reale
 * Reinach
 * Renner
 * Ross
 * Savigny
 * Scaevola
 * Schmitt
 * Shang
 * Simmonds
 * Somló
 * Suárez
 * Tribe
 * Unger
 * Voegelin
 * Waldron
 * Walzer
 * Weber

Theories * Analytical jurisprudence
 * Deontological ethics
 * Interpretivism
 * Legalism
 * Legal moralism
 * Legal positivism
 * Legal realism
 * Libertarian theories of law
 * Natural law
 * Paternalism
 * Utilitarianism
 * Virtue jurisprudence

Concepts * Dharma
 * Fa
 * Judicial interpretation
 * Justice
 * Legal system
 * Li
 * Rational-legal authority

Related articles * Law
 * Political philosophy
 * more...

 *   Category
 *   Law portal
 * Philosophy portal
 *   WikiProject Law
 * WikiProject Philosophy
 * changes

Authority control * NDL: 00565542For other uses, see Party (disambiguation)."Pool party" redirects here. For other uses, see Pool party (disambiguation).Hip, Hip,
Hurrah!  (1888) by Peder Severin Krøyer, a painting portraying an artists' party in 19th century Denmark
A September 1945 street party  in Selborne Road, Kent, celebrating victory in the Second World WarA party  is a gathering of people who have been invited by a host  for the purposes of socializing, conversation, recreation, or
as part of a festival  or other commemoration of a special occasion. A party will typically feature food  and beverages, and often
 music  and dancing  or other forms of entertainment. In many Western countries, parties for teens and adults are associated with
drinking alcohol such as beer, wine  or distilled spirits.



DESCRIPTION
Some parties are held in honor  of a specific person, day, or event, such as a birthday party, a Super Bowl  party, or a St.
Patrick’s Day  party. Parties of this kind are often called celebrations. A party is not necessarily a private occasion. Public
parties are sometimes held in restaurants, pubs, beer gardens, nightclubs  or bars, and people attending such parties may be
charged an admission fee by the host. Large parties in public streets may celebrate events such as Mardi Gras  or the signing of a
 peace treaty  ending a long war.

TYPES OF PARTIES
BIRTHDAY PARTY
"Birthday party" redirects here. For other uses, see Birthday party (disambiguation).
A birthday cake  with lit novelty candles
Children at a birthday partyA birthday  party is a celebration of the anniversary  of the birth of the person who is being honored. The tradition started in
the mid-nineteenth century but did not become popular until the mid-twentieth century.[1]  Birthday parties are now a feature of
many cultures.

In Western cultures, birthday parties include a number of common rituals. The guests may be asked to bring a gift for the honored
person. Party locations are often decorated with colorful decorations, such as balloons  and streamers. A birthday cake  is
usually served with lit candles that are to be blown out after a "birthday wish" has been made. The person being honored will be
given the first piece of cake. While the birthday cake is being brought to the table, the song "Happy Birthday to You" or some
other birthday song is sung by the guests.

At parties for children, time is often taken for the "gift opening" wherein the individual whose birthday is celebrated opens each
of the gifts brought. It is also common at children's parties for the host to give parting gifts to the attendees in the form of
"goodie bags". Children and even adults sometimes wear colorful cone-shaped party hats.

Birthday parties are often larger and more extravagant if they celebrate someone who has reached what is regarded in the culture
as a milestone age, such as transition from childhood to adulthood. Examples of traditional coming of age  celebrations include
the North American sweet sixteen party  and the Latin American quinceañera.

SURPRISE PARTY
"Surprise party" redirects here. For other uses, see Surprise party (disambiguation).A surprise party is a party that is not made
known beforehand to the person in whose honor it is being held.

Birthday surprise parties are the most common kind of surprise party. At most such parties, the guests will arrive an hour or so
before the honored person arrives. Often, a friend in on the surprise will lead the honored person to the location of the party
without letting on anything.

The guests might even conceal themselves from view, and when the honored person enters the room, they leap from hiding and all
shout, "Surprise!" For some surprise birthday parties, it is considered to be a good tactic to shock the honored person.
Streamers, silly string, and balloons  may be used for this purpose. Evidence of a party, such as decorations and balloons, are
not made visible from the exterior of the home, so that the honored person will suspect nothing.

DINNER PARTY
A buffet (Smörgåsbord) set for a party on board a Swedish ship for Christmas 1990.A dinner party is a social gathering at which
people eat dinner  together, usually in the host’s home. At the most formal dinner parties, the dinner is served on a dining table
with place settings. Dinner parties are often preceded by a cocktail hour  in a living room or bar, where guests drink cocktails 
while mingling and conversing.[2]  Wine  is usually served throughout the meal, often with a different wine accompanying each
course.

At less formal dinner parties, a buffet  is provided. Guests choose food from the buffet and eat while standing up and conversing.
Women guests may wear cocktail dresses; men may wear blazers.

At some informal dinner parties, the host may ask guests to bring food or beverages  (a main dish, a side dish, a dessert, or 
appetizers). A party of this type is called a potluck  or potluck dinner. In the United States, potlucks are very often held in
churches and community centers.

GARDEN PARTY
A garden party is a party in a park  or a garden. An event described as a garden party is usually more formal than other outdoor
gatherings, which may be called simply parties, picnics, barbecues, etc. A garden party can be a prestigious event. For example,
invitations by the British Sovereign  to garden parties at Buckingham Palace  are considered an honor. The President of France
holds a garden party at the Palais de l'Elysée  in Paris on Bastille Day.

COCKTAIL PARTY
Main article: Cocktail partyA cocktail party is a party at which cocktails  are served. It is sometimes called a "cocktail reception". Women who attend a
cocktail party may wear a cocktail dress. A cocktail hat  is sometimes worn as a fashion statement.

TEA PARTY
An outdoor tea party in Australia (between 1900 and 1910)Main article: Tea party (social gathering)In Anglo-American culture, a tea  party is a formal gathering for afternoon tea. These parties were traditionally attended only by
women, but men may also be invited. Tea parties are often characterized by the use of prestigious tableware, such as bone china 
and silver. The table, whatever its size or cost, is made to look its prettiest, with cloth napkins and matching cups and plates.

In addition to tea, larger parties may serve punch or, in cold weather, hot chocolate. The tea is accompanied by a variety of
easily managed foods. Thin sandwiches  such as cucumber  or tomato, bananas, cake slices, buns, and cookies  are all common
choices.

RECEPTION
Reception at an art exhibition openingFormal receptions are parties that are designed to receive a large number of guests, often
at prestigious venues such as Buckingham Palace, the White House  or Government Houses of the British Empire and Commonwealth. The
hosts and any guests of honor form a receiving line  in order of precedence  near the entrance. Each guest is announced to the
host who greets each one in turn as he or she arrives. Each guest properly speaks little more than his name (if necessary) and a
conventional greeting or congratulation to each person in the receiving line. In this way, the line of guests progresses steadily
without unnecessary delay. After formally receiving each guest in this fashion, the hosts may mingle with the guests.

Somewhat less formal receptions are common in academic settings, sometimes to honor a guest lecturer, or to celebrate a special
occasion such as retirement of a respected member of staff. Receptions are also common in symposium  or academic conference 
settings, as an environment for attendees to mingle and interact informally. These gatherings may be accompanied by a sit-down
dinner, or more commonly, a stand-up informal buffet  meal.

Receptions are also held to celebrate exhibition openings  at art galleries  or museums. The featured artist or artists are often
present, as well as the curators  who organized the exhibition. In addition or instead, a celebratory reception may be held
partway through or at the end of an exhibition run. This alternative scheduling allows guests more time to see the exhibition in
depth at their own pace, before meeting the featured guests. Some food is often served, as in academic gatherings.

Refreshments at a reception may be as minimal, such as coffee or lemonade, or as elaborate as those at a state dinner.

DANCES AND BALLS
Folk dance  in an Assyrian  party, Chicago, USA.Main article: Dance partyA dance is a social gathering at which the guests dance.
It may be a casual, informal affair or a structured event, such as a school dance  or a charity ball. Dances usually take place
during the evening. An afternoon dance is formally known as a tea dance. Some dances feature specific kinds of dancing, such as 
square dancing.

A ball  is a large formal party that features ballroom dancing. Women guests wear ball gowns; men wear evening dress.

BLOCK PARTY
Main articles: Block party  and Street partyA block party is a public party that is attended by the residents of a specific city
block or neighborhood. These parties are typically held in a city street that has been closed to traffic to accommodate the party.
At some block parties, attendees are free to pass from house to house, socializing, and often drinking alcoholic beverages.

COSTUME OR FANCY DRESS PARTY
At a masquerade ball, guests wear masks  to conceal their identities. Guests at a costume party  or a fancy dress party wear
costumes. These parties are sometimes associated with holiday events, such as Halloween  and Mardi Gras.

CHRISTMAS CAROLING PARTY
In English  and American  culture during the Christmas  season, it is traditional to have a Christmas caroling party. People go
from door to door in a neighborhood and sing Christmas carols. Some popular Christmas carols are "We Wish You a Merry Christmas",
"Deck the Halls", "The Twelve Days of Christmas", "Frosty the Snowman", "Jingle Bells", "Silver Bells", "Santa Claus Is Coming to
Town", and "O Holy Night".

In Spain, this type of party is called El Aguinaldo. It is the same as in England and the United States, but the only difference
is that the children who sing the carols are given tips.[3]  Christmas songs are called villancios  in Spain; they are mainly sung
by children at small parties.[4]

PARTIES FOR TEENAGERS AND YOUNG ADULTS
A dance party  supported by a live band  (SO36, Berlin)Dance parties  are gatherings in bars or community centers where the guests dance to house music, techno music, or disco. The
music for dance parties is usually selected and played by a disc jockey.

A spin-off of dance parties, the rave  involves dancing to loud house music, techno music, or industrial music. Rave parties may
be attended by as few as a score of people in a basement or, more likely, by a few hundred people in a club, to as many as
thousands in a large warehouse, field, or even tens of thousands in a sporting arena, amusement park, or other large space. Raves
are associated with illegal drugs such as Ecstasy  and psychedelic drugs.

A house party  is a party where a large group of people get together at a private home to socialize. House parties that involve
the drinking of beer pumped from a keg  are called keg parties or “keggers.” These parties are popular in North America, the 
United Kingdom, and Australia  and are often attended by people under the legal drinking age. Sometimes, even older party-goers
run afoul of the law for having provided alcoholic beverages  to minors. Arrests may also be made for violating a noise 
ordinance, for disorderly conduct,[5]  and even for operating a “blind pig”, an establishment that illegally sells alcoholic
beverages.

Outdoor parties include bush parties and beach parties. Bush parties (also called “field parties”) are held in a secluded area of
a forest (“bush”), where friends gather to drink  and talk. These parties are often held around a bonfire. Beach parties are held
on a sandy shoreline of a lake, river, or sea, and also often feature a bonfire.

A pool party is a party in which the guests swim in a swimming pool.

School-related parties for teenagers and young adults include proms  and graduation parties, which are held in honor of someone
who has recently graduated from a school or university.

SINGLES DANCE PARTY AND MIXER
A singles dance party and mixer is a party which is organized for people who are not married and who want to find a partner for 
friendship, dating, or sex.

Usually a “mixer game” is played, to make it easy for people to meet each other. For example, each guest may be given a card with
an inspiring quotation on it. The game is to find a potential partner who has the same quotation. Couples who have matching cards
may be given a small prize.

These parties are sponsored by various organizations, both non-profit and for-profit.

FUNDRAISING PARTY
A fundraising party, or fundraiser, is a party that is held for the purpose of collecting money that will be given to some person
or to some institution, such as a school, charity, business, or political campaign. These parties are usually formal and consist
of a dinner followed by speeches or by a presentation extolling whatever the money is being raised for.

It is very common to charge an admission fee for parties of this kind. This fee may be as high as several thousand dollars,
especially if money is being raised for a political campaign.

GRADUATION PARTY
In some places, parties to celebrate graduation from school, college or university are popular.

MARRIAGE-RELATED PARTIES
Wedding Feast in front of a Farm  by Flemish artist Pieter Brueghel  c. 1620 * Bridal shower
 * Bachelor party  (aka UK: stag night; Australia: Bucks Night)
 * Bachelorette party  (aka hen night, hen party)
 * Wedding reception
 * Divorce party

SHOWERS
See also: Bridal shower  and Baby showerA shower is a party whose primary purpose is to give gifts to the guest of honor, commonly
a bride-to-be  or a mother-to-be. Guests who attend are expected to bring a small gift, usually related to the upcoming life
event, like getting married or having a baby. Themed games are a frequent sight during showers as well.

HOUSEWARMING PARTY
Main article: Housewarming partyA housewarming party may be held when a family, couple, or person moves into a new house or
apartment. It is an occasion for the hosts to show their new home to their friends. Housewarming parties are typically informal
and do not include any planned activities other than a tour of the new house or apartment. Invited family members and friends may
bring gifts for the new home.

WELCOME PARTY
A welcome party is held for the purpose of welcoming a newcomer, such as a new club member, a new employee, or a family's new
baby.

FAREWELL PARTY
In many cultures, it is customary to throw a farewell party in honor of someone who is moving away or departing on a long trip
(sometimes called a bon voyage  party). Retirement parties for departing co-workers fall into this category.

CAST PARTY
A cast party is a celebration following the final performance of a theatric event, such as a play, a musical, or an opera. A party
of this kind may also be held following the end of shooting for a motion picture  (called a “wrap party”) or after the season’s
final episode of a television series. Cast parties are traditionally held for most theater performances, both professional and
amateur.

Invited guests are usually restricted to performers, crew members, and a few others who did not participate in the performance,
such as sponsors and donors who have helped fund the production.

PRE-PARTY
A pre-party is a party that is held immediately before some event, such as a school dance, a wedding, a birthday party, or a bar
mitzvah. These parties are usually of short duration and sometimes involve getting ready for the event (e.g., the guests may put
on makeup or costumes). Guests usually leave at the same time and arrive at the event together. Often people engage in pregaming 
or drinking before an event or a night out, especially if the event lacks access to alcohol.

AFTER-PARTY
"Afterparty" redirects here. For Cool Kids of Death album, see Afterparty (album).An after-party is a party that is held after a
musical or theatrical performance or after some other event, such as a wedding  or a school dance. Guests are usually limited to
friends of the host.

PARTIES ON SPECIAL DAYS
Main article: HolidayA Party in the Open Air  by Isaac Oliver, c. 1590International

 * Christmas
 * Halloween
 * International Friendship Day
 * Mardi Gras
 * New Year's Day
 * New Year's Eve

Australia

 * Australia Day
 * Grand Final Saturday
 * Melbourne Cup Day  (Melbourne metropolitan region only)

Canada

 * Canada Day
 * Victoria Day

France

 * Bastille Day

Germany

 * German Unity Day
 * May Day  aka Tag der Arbeit
 * Reformation Day
 * Rosenmontag  aka Rose Monday, highlight of the German carnival

India

 * Chaand Raat  (Eid)
 * Diwali
 * Holi
 * Christmas

Iran  and other Persified societies

 * Nowruz

Ireland

 * Saint Patrick’s Day

Israel

 * Passover
 * Hanukkah
 * Purim

Mexico

 * Cinco de Mayo

New Zealand

 * Waitangi Day

Pakistan

 * Pakistan Day
 * Yom-e-Istiqlal
 * Basant

Scotland

 * Hogmanay

Sweden

 * Midsummer Eve

United Kingdom

 * Guy Fawkes Night

United States

 * Independence Day, aka the Fourth of July
 * Super Bowl Sunday

Uruguay

 * Nostalgia Night, the night before the Declaration of Independence

PARTIES ASSOCIATED WITH RELIGIOUS EVENTS
Christian

 * Christmas
 * Easter
 * Mardi Gras
 * Saint Patrick’s Day

Islamic

 * Eid al-Adha
 * Eid ul-Fitr

Jewish

 * Hanukkah
 * Passover
 * Purim

FAMOUS PARTIES
A steampunk airship art car  built by the Airpusher Collective at Burning Man  2014 * Exotic Erotic Ball
 * Burning Man
 * Full Moon Party
 * Lollapalooza
 * Nuit Blanche
 * Woodstock Festival
 * Soul Clap and Dance-Off

MISCELLANEOUS PARTIES
People posing at an outdoor party in CanadaGame partyA social gathering during which the guests play party games  or board games.
LAN partyA party that involves multi-player computer games and uses a Local Area Network.Party planA form of direct selling, in
which a party is used to sell products (for example, a Tupperware  party).Political housepartyA party that is hosted in a private
home for the purpose of supporting a particular candidate, political party, or ballot measure, or to share information and
opinions about an upcoming election.Sleepover party, also called a pajama party or slumber partyA party for which the guests are
invited to stay overnight at the home of the host. These parties are usually for teenagers  or young children.Toga partyA party in
which the guests wear togas.GALLERY
 * Children at a birthday party
   
   
 * A house party in Denver
   
   
 * Beach party - Haifa, Israel (2011)
   
   
 * Young adults at a pool party
   
   

SEE ALSO
 * Cocktail party
 * Convention (meeting)
 * Crayfish party
 * Cuddle party
 * Drinking culture
 * Event management
 * Event planning
 * Festival
 * Gate-crashing
 * Pizza party
 * Naked party
 * Rave party
 * Spring break

REFERENCES
 1. ^  Korab, Holly. "A Brief History of Birthday Parties". LAS News. Retrieved 2 October  2012.
 2. ^  "Dinner Party". HGTV. Retrieved 2 October  2012.
 3. ^  "aguinaldo". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 2012-06-18.
 4. ^  "don Quijote". don Quijote. Retrieved 2012-06-18.
 5. ^  Law would tag beer kegs to fight use by the young  “While it affects all adults who buy kegs, the proposed law is aimed at
    the 21-to-23-year-old crowd, particularly college students, who don’t think twice about buying a keg or 10 for a weekend bash.
    Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 2001-11-04.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Parties. * Tung, Jennifer (2005). In Style Parties: The Complete Guide to Easy, Elegant Entertaining. New York: Melcher Media, Inc. ISBN
   978-1-932994-11-7.

Authority control * GND: 4121260-5For other uses, see Nation (disambiguation).Not to be confused with State (polity)  or Country.A nation  (from Latin: natio, "people, tribe, kin, genus, class, flock") is a large group or collective of people with common
characteristics attributed to them - including language, traditions, mores  (customs), habitus  (habits), and ethnicity. By
comparison, a nation is more impersonal, abstract, and overtly political than an ethnic group. It is a cultural-political
community that has become conscious of its autonomy, unity, and particular interests.[1]

Joseph Stalin's Marxism and the National Question  (1913) declares that "a nation is not a racial  or tribal, but a historically
constituted community  of people;" "a nation is not a casual or ephemeral conglomeration, but a stable community of people"; "a
nation is formed only as a result of lengthy and systematic intercourse, as a result of people living together generation after
generation"; and, in its entirety: "a nation is a historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a
common language, territory, economic life, and psychological make-up manifested in a common culture."[2]

The nation has been described by Benedict Anderson  as an "imagined community"[3]  and by Paul James  as an "abstract community".
[4]  It is an imagined community in the sense that the material conditions exist for imagining extended and shared connections. It
is an abstract community in the sense that it is objectively impersonal, even if each individual in the nation experiences him or
herself as subjectively part of an embodied unity with others. For the most part, members of a nation remain strangers to each
other and will never likely meet.[5]  Hence the phrase, "a nation of strangers" used by such writers as Vance Packard.



ETYMOLOGY AND TERMINOLOGY
The word nation  came to English from the Old French  word nacion  - meaning "birth" (naissance), "place of origin" -, which in
turn originates from the Latin  word natio  (nātĭō) literally meaning "birth".[6]

The word "nation" is sometimes used as synonym for:

 * State (polity)  or sovereign state: a government which controls a specific territory, which may or may not be associated with
   any particular ethnic group
 * Country: a geographic territory, which may or may not have an affiliation with a government or ethnic group

Thus the phrase "nations of the world" could be referring to the top-level governments (as in the name for the United Nations),
various large geographical territories, or various large ethnic groups of the planet.

Depending on the meaning of "nation" used, the term "nation state" could be used to distinguish larger states from small city
states, or could be used to distinguish multinational states  from those with a single ethnic group.

ANCIENT NATIONS
The neutrality  of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message
until conditions to do so are met.  (July 2015)  (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Although some scholars[7]  of nationalism  argue that nations are a modern phenomenon arising around the time of the French
Revolution, other scholars assert that nations are an old, or even an ancient, type of political formation. Political scientist 
Azar Gat  argues that ancient Egypt was the world's "first national state," emerging "quite early as a unified state, congruent
with a distinct people of shared ethnicity."[8]

Gat goes on to argue that the next group of national states to emerge were in the ancient Levant, citing Steven Grosby's book, 
Biblical Ideas of Nationality: Ancient and Modern, as an effective demonstration of the emergence of nations in Israel, Ammon, 
Moab, and Edom, a process of nation-formation provoked by the threat of conquest by the Assyrian Empire.[9]  In particular, Gat
cites Hans Kohn's The Idea of Nationalism: A Study in Its Origins and Background, 1944, pp. 27–30 as an early scholarly treatment
of "the idea that ancient Israel was an example of a premodern nation."[10]

In his book, The Athenian Nation  Edward E. Cohen, argues that ancient Athens met all modern definitions of nationhood,[11]  and 
Aviel Roshwald  makes a similar argument in The Endurance of Nationalism: Ancient Roots and Modern Dilemmas.[12]

MEDIEVAL NATIONS
In her book Kingdoms and Communities in Western Europe 900-1300, Susan Reynolds  argues that many European medieval kingdoms were
nations in the modern sense except that political participation in nationalism was available only to a limited prosperous and
literate class.[13]  In his book The Construction of Nationhood: Ethnicity, Religion and Nationalism, Adrian Hastings  argues that
England's Anglo Saxon kings mobilized mass nationalism in their struggle to repel Norse invasions. Hastings argues that Alfred
the
Great, in particular, drew on biblical nationalism, using biblical language in his law code and that during his reign selected
books of the Bible were translated into Old English  to inspire Englishmen to fight to turn back the Norse invaders. Hastings
argues for a strong renewal of English nationalism (following a hiatus after the Norman conquest) beginning with the translation
of the complete bible into English by the Wycliffe circle in the 1380s, arguing that English nationalism  and the English nation
have been continuous since that time.[14]

Another prudent example of Medieval nationalism is the Declaration of Arbroath, a document produced by Scottish nobles and clergy
during the Scottish Wars of Independence. The purpose of the document was to demonstrate to the Pope that Scotland was indeed a
nation of its own, with its own unique culture, history and language and that it was indeed an older nation than England. The
document went on to justify the actions of Robert the Bruce  and his forces in resisting the occupation and to chastise the
English for having violated Scottish sovereignty without justification. The propaganda campaign supplemented a military campaign
on the part of the Bruce, which after the Battle of Bannockburn  was successful and eventually resulted in the end of England's
occupation and recognition of Scottish independence on the part of the English crown. The document is widely seen as an early
example of both Scottish nationalism  and popular sovereignty.

Anthony Kaldellis  affirms in Hellenism in Byzantium  (2008) that what is called the Byzantine Empire  was the Roman Empire
transformed into a nation-state  in Middle Ages.

Azar Gat is among the scholars who argue that China, Korea  and Japan  were nations by the time of the European Middle Ages.[15]

USE OF TERM NATIONES  BY MEDIEVAL UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER MEDIEVAL INSTITUTIONS
Main article: Nation (university)A significant early use of the term nation, as natio, occurred at mediaeval universities[16]  to describe the colleagues in a
college or students, above all at the University of Paris, who were all born within a pays, spoke the same language and expected
to be ruled by their own familiar law. In 1383 and 1384, while studying theology at Paris, Jean Gerson  was elected twice as a
procurator for the French natio. The University of Prague  adopted the division of students into nationes: from its opening in
1349 the studium generale  which consisted of Bohemian, Bavarian, Saxon and Silesian nations.

In a similar way, the nationes  were segregated by the Knights Hospitaller of Jerusalem, who maintained at Rhodes  the hostels
from which they took their name "where foreigners eat and have their places of meeting, each nation apart from the others, and a
Knight has charge of each one of these hostels, and provides for the necessities of the inmates according to their religion", as
the Spanish traveller Pedro Tafur  noted in 1436.[17]

EARLY MODERN NATIONS
See also: Nation stateIn his article, "The Mosaic Moment: An Early Modernist Critique of the Modernist Theory of Nationalism", Philip S. Gorski  argues
that the first modern nation was the Dutch Republic, created by a fully modern political nationalism rooted in the model of 
biblical nationalism.[18]  In a 2013 article "Biblical nationalism and the sixteenth-century states", Diana Muir Appelbaum 
expands Gorski's argument to apply to a series of new, Protestant, sixteenth-century nation states.[19]  A similar, albeit
broader, argument was made by Anthony D. Smith  in his books, Chosen Peoples: Sacred Sources of National Identity  and Myths and
Memories of the Nation.[20]

In her book Nationalism: Five Roads to Modernity, Liah Greenfeld  argued that nationalism was invented in England by 1600.
According to Greenfeld, England was “the first nation in the world".[21][22]

SOCIAL SCIENCE
In the late 20th century, many social scientists argued that there were two types of nations, the civic nation  of which France
was the principal example and the ethnic nation  exemplified by the German peoples. The German tradition was conceptualized as
originating with early 19th-century philosophers, like Johann Gottlieb Fichte, and referred to people sharing a common language,
religion, culture, history, and ethnic origins, that differentiate them from people of other nations.[23]  On the other hand, the
civic nation was traced to the French Revolution  and ideas deriving from 18th-century French philosophers. It was understood as
being centered in a willingness to "live together", this producing a nation that results from an act of affirmation.[24]  This is
the vision, among others, of Ernest Renan.[23]

Present day analysis tend to be based in socio-historical studies about the building of national identity  sentiments, trying to
identify the individual and collective mechanisms, either conscient or non-conscient, intended or un-intended. According to some
of these studies, it seems that the State  often plays a significant role, and communications, particularly of economic content,
also have a high significance.[23]

BLACK NATIONALISM
See also: African diasporaThe 18th century brought an alteration to the meaning of the term "nation", which became more narrowly
referred to as a group with a recognizable and sovereign government with physical borders. This new definition aligns more with
the concept of a nation-state.[25]  The nation began to emerge in the late 18th century as the leading form of government and
social organization.[26]  In the Americas, the catalyst that brought about this change in meaning was the influence of the African
diaspora and its people in other states.[citation needed]  National identity brought rights to vote, to hold office, and
independence for a growing number of black territories held under colonial rule.[27]

This change occurred in the New World as Africans were brought as enslaved peoples.[citation needed]  The white population of the
New World considered these aliens to be in one category of nation that was based entirely on color and continent of origin. The
identity of the enslaved at the time was then shaped by their skin color rather than what nation or tribe they truly originated
from. Prior to the 18th and 19th centuries, the term mainly referred to a group of people unified by language, region and cultural
background; what is now considered to be one's ethnicity. It was through the process of emancipation and the end of the slave
trade that the concept of nation began to change. As the previously enslaved began to fight for rights they had to discover what
kind of rights they were searching for. It was in this process of emancipation that nationality began to take on a different
meaning. Language and cultural background were no longer the only requirements of nation. Instead, now the idea of an established
government and physical boundaries also shaped what it meant to be a nation.[28]

However, within the diaspora, particularly among groups that have been politicized, the term nation  has been used to describe a
more abstract national experience, one that transcends physical borders and language differences. This description of nation is
pinned to the shared experience of being radicalized and termed as Black. The expansion of Black nationalism  demonstrates that
although some expanded the view that nation requires definable boundaries, those who shared the experience of the diaspora also
found a nationality among themselves.

NATION OF ISLAM
Main article: Nation of IslamThe NOI teaches that black people constitute a nation and that through the institution of the Atlantic slave trade  they were
systematically denied knowledge of their history, language, culture, and religion  and, in effect, lost control of their lives.
Founder Elijah Muhammad  called for the establishment of a separate nation for black Americans and the adoption of a religion
based on the worship of Allah  and on the belief that blacks were his chosen people.

SEE ALSO
 * Citizenship
 * Country
 * Government
 * Identity (social science)
 * Imagined Communities
 * Invented tradition
 * Lists of people by nationality
 * Meta-ethnicity
 * Multinational state
 * National emblem
 * National god
 * Nationalism
 * Nationality
 * Polity
 * Qaum
 * Race (human classification)
 * Separatism
 * Society
 * Sovereign state
 * Tribe
 * United Nations

NOTES
REFERENCES
 1.  ^  Anthony D. Smith (8 January 1991). The Ethnic Origins of Nations. Wiley. p. 17. ISBN978-0-631-16169-1.
 2.  ^  Stalin, Joseph. "Marxism and the National Question". marxists.org. Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 10 May  2016.
 3.  ^  Anderson, Benedict (1983). Imagined Communities. London: Verso Publications.
 4.  ^  James, Paul (1996). Nation Formation: Towards a Theory of Abstract Community. London: Sage Publications. p. 34 'A nation
     is at once an objectively abstract society of strangers, usually connected by a state, and a subjectively embodied community
     whose members experience themselves as an integrated group of compatriots.'. ISBN0-7619-5072-9.
 5.  ^  James, Paul  (2006). Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism: Bringing Theory Back In. London: Sage Publications.
 6.  ^  Harper, Douglas. "Nation". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 5 June  2011..
 7.  ^  Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism, 1983.
 8.  ^  Nations: The Long History and Deep Roots of Political Ethnicity and Nationalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     2013, p. 85
 9.  ^  Nations: The Long History and Deep Roots of Political Ethnicity and Nationalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     2013, p. 89
 10. ^  Nations: The Long History and Deep Roots of Political Ethnicity and Nationalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
     2013, p. 90
 11. ^  Edward E. Cohen, The Athenian Nation. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000
 12. ^  The Endurance of Nationalism: Ancient Roots and Modern Dilemmas (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006).
 13. ^  Susan Reynolds, Kingdoms and Communities in Western Europe 900-1300, Oxford, 1997.
 14. ^  Adrian Hastings, The Construction of Nationhood: Ethnicity, Religion and Nationalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 1997
 15. ^  Azar Gat, Nations: The Long History and Deep Roots of Political Ethnicity and Nationalism, Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press. 2013, China, p. 93 Korea, p. 104 and Japan p., 105.
 16. ^  see: nation (university)
 17. ^  Pedro Tafur, Andanças e viajes.
 18. ^  Philip S. Gorski, "The Mosaic Moment: An Early Modernist Critique of the Modernist Theory of Nationalism", American
     Journal of Sociology 105:5 (2000), pp. 1428–68.[1]
 19. ^  Diana Muir Appelbaum, Biblical nationalism and the sixteenth-century states, National Identities, 2013, [2]
 20. ^  Anthony D. Smith, Chosen Peoples: Sacred Sources of National Identity (Oxford University Press, 2003) and Myths and
     Memories of the Nation (Oxford University Press, 1999).
 21. ^  Steven Guilbert, The Making of English National Identity, http://www.cercles.com/review/R12/kumar7.htm
 22. ^  Liah Greenfeld, Nationalism: Five Roads to Modernity, Harvard University Press, 1992.
 23. ^ a  b  c  Noiriel, Gérard (1992). Population, immigration et identité national en France:XIX-XX Siècle. Hachette. ISBN
     2010166779.
 24. ^  Rogers Brubaker, Citizenship and nationhood in France and Germany, Harvard University Press, 1992, ISBN 978-0-674-13178-1
 25. ^  Bauböck, Rainer, and Thomas Faist. Diaspora and Transnationalism: Concepts, Theories and Methods. Amsterdam: Amsterdam UP,
     2010. Print.
 26. ^  Manning, Patrick  (2013). The African Diaspora: A History through Culture. Columbia studies in international and global
     history. Columbia University Press. p. np. ISBN9780231513555. Retrieved 2014-01-02. The nation began to emerge, in the late
     eighteenth century, as the leading form of government and social organization.
 27. ^  Manning, Patrick  (2013). The African Diaspora: A History through Culture. Columbia studies in international and global
     history. Columbia University Press. p. np. ISBN9780231513555. Retrieved 2014-01-02. Haiti and Liberia stand out as early
     black nations; the United States and Brazil stand out as early, multicultural nations with large black populations.
     Nationhood came gradually to all black people. National identity brought rights to vote, to hold office, and independence for
     a growing number of black territories held under colonial rule.
 28. ^  Manning, Patrick. The African Diaspora: A History through Culture. New York: Columbia UP, 2009. Print.

SOURCES
 * Anderson, Benedict (1983). Imagined Communities. London: Verso Publications.
 * Gellner, Ernest (1983). Nations and Nationalism. Cambridge: Blackwell.
 * James, Paul  (1996). Nation Formation: Towards a Theory of Abstract Community. London: Sage Publications.
 * James, Paul  (2006). Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism: Bringing Theory Back In —Volume 2 of Towards a Theory of Abstract
   Community. London: Sage Publications.
 * Smith, Anthony (1986). The Ethnic Origins of Nations. London: Blackwell.

FURTHER READING
 * Manent, Pierre  (2007). "What is a Nation?", The Intercollegiate Review, Vol. XLII, No. 2, pp. 23–31.
 * Renan, Ernest  (1896). "What is a Nation?"  In: The Poetry of the Celtic Races, and Other Essays. London: The Walter Scott
   Publishing Co., pp. 61–83.

Wikiquote has quotations related to: Nation * v
 * t
 * e

EthnicityRelated concepts * Clan
 * Ethnic group * Ethno-linguistic group
    * Ethno-religious group
   
   
 * Indigenous peoples
 * Ingroups and outgroups
 * Meta-ethnicity
 * Metroethnicity
 * Minority group
 * Monoethnicity
 * Nation
 * Nationality
 * Panethnicity
 * Polyethnicity
 * Population
 * Race
 * Symbolic ethnicity
 * Tribe

Ethnology * Anthropology
 * Ethnic studies
 * Ethnoarchaeology
 * Ethnobiology * Ethnobotany
    * Ethnozoology
    * Ethnoecology
   
   
 * Ethnocinema
 * Ethnogeology
 * Ethnography * Autoethnography
    * Clinical
    * Critical
    * Cyber-
    * Netnography
    * Online
    * Person-centered
    * Salvage
    * Transidioethnography
    * Video
   
   
 * Ethnohistory
 * Ethnolinguistics
 * Ethnology
 * Ethnomathematics
 * Ethnomethodology
 * Ethnomuseology
 * Ethnomusicology
 * Ethnophilosophy
 * Ethnopoetics
 * Ethnoscience
 * Ethnosemiotics
 * Ethnotaxonomy

Groups by region * Africa
 * Europe
 * Oceania

 * Arab League
 * Europe
 * Australian * indigenous
   
   
 * Indigenous Oceanian
 * Europeans in Oceania

Americas * Indigenous
 * Canada
 * Mexico
 * United States
 * Central America
 * South America

Asia * Central
 * East
 * Northern
 * South
 * Southeast
 * West

Identity  and
ethnogenesis * Cross-race effect
 * Cultural assimilation
 * Cultural identity
 * Demonym
 * Development
 * Endonym
 * Ethnic flag
 * Ethnic option
 * Ethnic origin
 * Ethnic religion
 * Ethnicity in census
 * Ethnofiction
 * Ethnonym
 * Folk religion
 * Historical
 * Imagined community
 * Kinship
 * Legendary progenitor
 * Lineage-bonded society
 * Mores
 * Nation-building
 * Nation state
 * National language
 * National myth
 * Origin myth
 * Pantribal sodalities
 * Tribal name
 * Tribalism
 * Urheimat

Multiethnic society * Consociationalism
 * Diaspora politics
 * Dominant minority
 * Ethnic democracy
 * Ethnic enclave
 * Ethnic interest group
 * Ethnic majority
 * Ethnic media
 * Ethnic pornography
 * Ethnic theme park
 * Ethnoburb
 * Ethnocracy
 * Ethnopluralism
 * Indigenous rights
 * Middleman minority
 * Minority rights
 * Model minority
 * Multinational state

Ideology and
ethnic conflict * Ethnic bioweapon
 * Ethnic cleansing
 * Ethnic hatred
 * Ethnic joke
 * Ethnic nationalism
 * Ethnic nepotism
 * Ethnic penalty
 * Ethnic slur
 * Ethnic stereotype
 * Ethnic violence
 * Ethnocentrism
 * Ethnocide
 * Ethnosymbolism
 * Indigenism
 * Separatist movements
 * Xenophobia