This article is about the country in Eurasia. For other uses, see Azerbaijan (disambiguation).Republic of Azerbaijan
Azərbaycan Respublikası(Azerbaijani)FlagEmblemAnthem: * Azərbaycan marşı
 * "March of Azerbaijan"
 * 

Location of Azerbaijan (green) and Nagorno Karabakh  (light green).CapitalBaku
40°25′N 49°50′E﻿ /40.417°N 49.833°E﻿ / 40.417; 49.833Official languagesAzerbaijaniDemonymAzerbaijaniGovernmentUnitary  
dominant-party  semi-presidential  republic •PresidentIlham Aliyev •Prime MinisterArtur RasizadeLegislatureNational Assembly
Formation •Democratic Republic28 May 1918 •Soviet Socialist Republic28 April 1920 •Independence from Soviet Union30 August 1991
(declared)
18 October 1991 (independence)
25 December 1991 (completed) •Constitution  adopted12 November 1995Area •Total86,600 km2  (114th)
33,436 sq mi •Water (%)1.6Population •2016 estimate9,754,830[1]  (89th) •Density112.6/km2  (103rd)
291.7/sq miGDP (PPP)2015 estimate •Total$168.4 billion[2] •Per capita$17,500[2]GDP (nominal)2015 estimate •Total$63.983 billion[2]
 •Per capita$6,794[2]Gini (2008)33.7[3]
mediumHDI  (2013)0.751[4]
high·  76thCurrencyManat  (₼) (AZN)Time zoneAZT  (UTC+04)Drives on therightCalling code+994ISO 3166 codeAZInternet TLD.aza.The
Nagorno-Karabakh Republic is an unrecognised  de facto  sovereign state, widely considered de jure  part of Azerbaijan.Azerbaijan  (i/ˌæzərbaɪˈdʒɑːn/  AZ-ər-by-JAHN; Azerbaijani: Azərbaycan), officially the Republic of Azerbaijan  (Azerbaijani: 
Azərbaycan Respublikası), is a country in the South Caucasus  region, situated at the crossroads of Southwest Asia and
Southeastern Europe.[5]  It is bounded by the Caspian Sea  to the east, Russia  to the north, Georgia  to the northwest, Armenia 
to the west and Iran  to the south. The exclave  of Nakhchivan  is bounded by Armenia to the north and east, Iran to the south and
west, while having an 8 km border with Turkey in the north west.

The Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  proclaimed its independence in 1918. The country was incorporated into the Soviet Union in
1920 as the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic.[6][7]  The modern Republic of Azerbaijan proclaimed its independence on 30
August 1991,[8]  prior to the official dissolution of the USSR  in December 1991. In September 1991, the Armenian majority of the
disputed Nagorno-Karabakh  region seceded to form the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.[9]  The region and seven adjacent districts
outside it  became de facto  independent with the end of the Nagorno-Karabakh War  in 1994. These regions are internationally
recognized as part of Azerbaijan pending a solution to the status of the Nagorno-Karabakh, found through negotiations facilitated
by the OSCE.[10][11][12][13]

Azerbaijan is a unitary semi-presidential  republic. The country is a member state of the Council of Europe, the OSCE  and the 
NATO  Partnership for Peace  (PfP) program. It is one of six independent Turkic states, an active member of the Turkic Council 
and the TÜRKSOY  community. Azerbaijan has diplomatic relations with 158 countries and holds membership in 38 international
organizations.[14]  It is one of the founding members of GUAM, the Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS)[15]  and the 
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. A member of the United Nations since 1992, Azerbaijan was elected to
membership in the newly established Human Rights Council  by the United Nations General Assembly  on 9 May 2006. Its term of
office began on 19 June 2006.[16]  Azerbaijan is also a member state of the Non-Aligned Movement, holds observer status in World
Trade Organization  and is a correspondent at the International Telecommunication Union.[14][17]

The Constitution of Azerbaijan  does not declare an official religion and all major political forces in the country are secularist
. However, the majority of the population consists of Shiite Muslims.[18]  Azerbaijan has a high level of human development  which
ranks on par with most Eastern European countries.[19]  It has a high rate of economic development[20]  and literacy,[21]  as well
as a low rate of unemployment.[22]

However, corruption in Azerbaijan is widespread, especially in the public service.[23][24]  The ruling party, the New Azerbaijan
Party, has been accused of authoritarianism and human rights abuses.[25][26]



ETYMOLOGY
Azerbaijan and its main citiesAccording to a modern etymology, the name of Azerbaijan derives from that of Atropates,[27][28]  a Persian[29][30][31]  satrap 
under the Achaemenid Empire, who was later reinstated as the satrap of Media  under Alexander the Great.[32][33]  The original
etymology of this name is thought to have its roots in the once-dominant Zoroastrian  religion. In the Avesta, Frawardin Yasht 
("Hymn to the Guardian Angels"), there is a mention of âterepâtahe ashaonô fravashîm ýazamaide, which literally translates from 
Avestan  as "we worship the Fravashi  of the holy Atropatene."[34]

Atropates  ruled over the region of Atropatene  (present Iranian Azerbaijan). The name "Atropates" itself is the Greek
transliteration of an Old Iranian, probably Median, compounded name with the meaning "Protected by the (Holy) Fire" or "The Land
of the (Holy) Fire".[35]  The Greek name was mentioned by Diodorus Siculus  and Strabo. Over the span of millennia the name
evolved to Āturpātākān  (Middle Iranian) then to Ādharbādhagān, Ādharbāyagān, Āzarbāydjān  (New Persian) and present-day 
Azerbaijan. Ultimately, the name Azerbaijan  comes from Azar-Payegan. This word is translatable as Guardian of Fire, "The
Treasury" and "The Treasurer" of fire  or "The Land of Fire"[35]  in Modern Persian.[36]  The name was changed to Azerbaijan 
following the Arab conquest in the 7th century AD; Arabic  lacked the letters G  and P, so Arabic speakers modified the spelling
of Azer-payegan.

In 1918, the Musavat government  adopted the name "Azerbaijan" for the newly established Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, which was
proclaimed on 27 May 1918,[37]  for political reasons,[38][39]  even though the name of "Azerbaijan" had always been used to refer
to the adjacent region of contemporary northwestern Iran.[40][41][42]  Thus, until 1918, when the Musavat regime decided to name
the newly independent state Azerbaijan, this designation had been used exclusively to identify the Iranian province of Azerbaijan.

[41][42][43]

HISTORY
Main article: History of AzerbaijanANTIQUITY
Further information: Atropatene  and Caucasian AlbaniaPetroglyphs  in Gobustan  dating back to 10,000 BC indicating a thriving
culture. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site  considered to be of "outstanding universal value".The earliest evidence of human
settlement in the territory of Azerbaijan dates back to the late Stone Age  and is related to the Guruchay culture  of the Azykh
Cave.[44]  The Upper Paleolithic  and late Bronze Age  cultures are attested in the caves of Tağılar, Damcılı, Zar, Yataq-yeri and
in the necropolises  of Leylatepe and Saraytepe.

Early settlements included the Scythians  in the 9th century BC.[35]  Following the Scythians, Iranian Medes  came to dominate the
area to the south of the Aras.[33]  The Medes forged a vast empire between 900–700 BC, which was integrated into the Achaemenid
Empire  around 550 BC. The area was conquered by the Achaemenids leading to the spread of Zoroastrianism.[45]  Later it became
part of Alexander the Great's Empire  and its successor, the Seleucid Empire. During this period, Zoroastrianism spread in the
Caucasus and Atropatene. Caucasian Albanians, the original inhabitants of northeastern Azerbaijan, ruled that area from around the
4th century BC, and established an independent kingdom.

In the 4th and 3rd centuries BC, following the overthrow of the Achaemenid Empire, the southwestern part of modern Azerbaijan was
part of the Kingdom of Armenia ruled by the Orontid Dynasty; between the years 189 BC and 428 AD the western half of modern
Azerbaijan, including the exclave of Nakhchivan, were included into the Kingdom of Greater Armenia  ruled by Armenia's Artaxiad 
and Arsacid  dynasties,[46][47]  the latter itself a branch of the eponymous Arsacid dynasty of Parthia.

After the partition of the Kingdom of Armenia  by Iran  and Byzantium  in 387 AD, the provinces of Artsakh  and Utik, which had an
ethnically mixed population, passed to Caucasian Albania.[48][49]

FEUDAL ERA
The Maiden Tower  and The Palace of the Shirvanshahs  in Old Baku  is a UNESCO World Heritage Site built in the 11th–12th century.
The Iranian Sassanids  turned Caucasian Albania into a vassal state  in AD 252, while King Urnayr  officially adopted Christianity
as the state religion in the 4th century. Despite Sassanid rule, Albania remained an entity in the region until the 9th century,
while fully subordinate to Sassanid Iran, and retained its monarchy.[32]

In the first half of the 7th century AD, the Islamic Umayyad Caliphate  repulsed both the Sassanids and Byzantines from the
Caucasus and turned Caucasian Albania into a vassal state after Christian resistance, led by King Javanshir, was suppressed in 667
AD. Caucasian Albania however, had already come under nominal Muslim rule through the Muslim conquest of Iran, as it was part of
the Sassanid territory upon advent of the Muslim conquest. The power vacuum left by the decline of the Abbasid Caliphate  was
filled by numerous local dynasties such as the Sallarids, Sajids, Shaddadids, Rawadids  and Buyids. At the beginning of the 11th
century, the territory was gradually seized by waves of Turkic  Oghuz  tribes from Central Asia. The first of these Turkic
dynasties established was the Seljuqs, who entered the area now known as Azerbaijan by 1067.

The pre-Turkic population that lived on the territory of modern Azerbaijani Republic spoke several Indo-European and Caucasian
languages, among them Armenian[50][51]  [52][53][54]  and an Iranian language  called the Old Azari language, which was gradually
replaced by a Turkic language, the early precursor of the Azerbaijani language  of today.[55]  To distinguish it from the Turkic
Azerbaijani or Azeri language, this Iranian language, is designated as the Azari language (or Old Azari language), because the
Turkic language and people are also designated as "Azarbaijani" or "Azari" in the Persian language. However some linguists have
also designated the Tati dialects  of Iranian Azerbaijan  and the Republic of Azerbaijan, like those spoken by the Tats, as a
remnant of Azari.[56][57]  Locally, the possessions of the subsequent Seljuq Empire  were ruled by Atabegs, technically vassals of
the Seljuq sultans, but sometimes de facto  rulers themselves. Under the Seljuq Turks, local poets such as Nizami Ganjavi  and 
Khagani Shirvani  gave rise to a blossoming of Persian literature  on the territory of present-day Azerbaijan.

The next ruling state of the Jalayirids  was short-lived and fell as a conquest of Timur.

The local dynasty of the Shirvanshahs  became a vassal  state of Timur's Empire, and assisted him in his war with the ruler of the
 Golden Horde  Tokhtamysh. Following Timur's death, two independent and rival states emerged: Kara Koyunlu  and Ak Koyunlu. The
Shirvanshahs returned, maintaining a high degree of autonomy as local rulers and vassals from 861 until 1539. During their
conquest and persecution by the Iranian Safavids  in 1501, the last dynasty imposed Shia Islam  upon the formerly Sunni 
population,[58][59][60]  as it did over its territories in modern-day Iran, as it was battling against the Sunni Ottoman Empire.
[61]  This, in combination with another series of events, the Safavids laid the foundation for the fact that Iran and the
contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan are the only Shia-majority countries ever since.[62]  Despite efforts of the Safavids, the
Ottomans briefly managed to occupy swaths of present-day Azerbaijan twice over the centuries. Also, Baku and its environs were
briefly managed by the Russians in the early 18th century as a consequence of the Russo-Persian War. Despite these very brief
intermissions by Safavid Iran's neighboring rivals, the land of what is nowadays Azerbaijan remained under intermittent  Iranian 
rule from the earliest advent of the Safavids up to the course of the 19th century.

MODERN ERA
Main articles: Russo-Persian Wars, Treaty of Gulistan, and Treaty of TurkmenchaySee also: Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, 
Azerbaijan SSR, and Operation Edelweiss
Territories of the Northern and Southern Khanates (and Sultanates) in the 18th–19th centuries.[63]After the Safavids, the area was ruled by the Iranian dynasties of Afshar  and Zand  and briefly by the Qajars, until the latter
was eventually forced to cede it to the Russian Empire in the course of the 19th century. However, self-ruling khanates  with
various forms of independence[64][65][66][67][68]  emerged in the area, especially following the collapse of the Zand dynasty and
in the early Qajar era. These khanates, though often self-ruling, were vassals  and subjects  of the Iranian shah.[69]  The
khanates exercised control over their affairs via international trade routes between Central Asia and the West.[70]  From the late
18th century on, Imperial Russia switched to a more aggressive geo-political stance towards its two neighbors and rivals to the
south, namely Iran and Turkey.[71]  Following a chain of events that started with the re-subjugation of Georgia into Iran  in
1795, Russia would now actively contest and battle with the latter over possession of the Caucasus region which was, for the most
part, in the hands of Iran.[72]  The successful Russian campaigns in the later stages of the Russo-Persian War (1804–13)  were
concluded with the Treaty of Gulistan, in which the shah's claims to some of the Khanates of the Caucasus were dismissed by Russia
on the ground that they had been de facto  independent long before their Russian occupation.[73]

The siege of Ganja Fortress in 1804  during the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813)  by Russian forces under the leadership of General 
Pavel Tsitsianov.Following Qajar Iran's loss in the 1804–1813 war, it was forced to concede suzerainty over most of the khanates,
along with Georgia and Dagestan to the Russian Empire, per the Gulistan  treaty.[74]

The area to the north of the river Aras, amongst which territory lies the contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan, was Iranian
territory until it was occupied by Russia in the 19th century.[6][75][76][77][78][79]  Under the Treaty of Turkmenchay  which
ended the Russo-Persian War (1826-1828), Qajar Iran  was forced to recognize Russian sovereignty over the Erivan Khanate, the 
Nakhchivan Khanate  and the remainder of the Lankaran Khanate,[74]  comprising the last parts of the soil of the contemporary
Azerbaijani Republic that were still in Iranian hands. After incorporation of all Caucasian territories from Iran into Russia, the
new border between the two was set at the Aras River, which, upon the Soviet Union's disintegration, subsequently became part of
the border between Iran and the Azerbaijan Republic.

Qajar Iran was forced to cede its Caucasian territories to Russia in the 19th century, which thus included the territory of the
modern-day Azerbaijan Republic, while as a result of that cession, the Azerbaijani ethnic group  is nowadays parted between two
nations: Iran and Azerbaijan.[80]  Furthermore, the number of ethnic Azerbaijanis in Iran far outnumber those in neighbouring
Azerbaijan.

After the collapse of the Russian Empire during World War I, the short-lived Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic  was
declared, constituting what are the present-day republics of Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Armenia.

It was followed by the March Days  massacres[81][82][83]  that took place between 30 March and 2 April 1918 in the city of Baku 
and adjacent areas of the Baku Governorate  of the Russian Empire.[84]  When the republic dissolved in May 1918, the leading 
Musavat  party declared independence as the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  (ADR), adopting the name of "Azerbaijan" for the new
republic; a name that prior to the proclamation of the ADR was solely used to refer to the adjacent northwestern region of
contemporary Iran.[40][41][42]  The ADR was the first modern parliamentary republic  in the Muslim world.[6][85][86]  Among the
important accomplishments of the Parliament was the extension of suffrage to women, making Azerbaijan the first Muslim nation to
grant women equal political rights with men.[85]  Another important accomplishment of ADR was the establishment of Baku State
University, which was the first modern-type university founded in Muslim East.[85]

Map presented by delegation from Azerbaijan to Paris Peace Conference  in 1919.By March 1920, it was obvious that Soviet Russia
would attack Baku. Vladimir Lenin  said that the invasion was justified as Soviet Russia  could not survive without Baku's oil.
[87][88]  Independent Azerbaijan lasted only 23 months until the Bolshevik  11th Soviet Red Army  invaded it, establishing the 
Azerbaijan SSR  on 28 April 1920. Although the bulk of the newly formed Azerbaijani army was engaged in putting down an Armenian
revolt that had just broken out in Karabakh, Azerbaijanis did not surrender their brief independence of 1918–20 quickly or easily.
As many as 20,000 Azerbaijani soldiers died resisting what was effectively a Russian reconquest.[89]

On 13 October 1921, the Soviet republics of Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia signed an agreement with Turkey known as the 
Treaty of Kars. The previously independent Naxicivan SSR would also become an autonomous ASSR within the Azerbaijan SSR by the
treaty of Kars. On the other hand, Armenia was awarded the region of Zangezur  and Turkey agreed to return Gyumri  (then known as
Alexandropol).

During World War II, Azerbaijan played a crucial role in the strategic energy policy of the Soviet Union, with 80 percent of the
Soviet Union's oil on the Eastern Front  being supplied by Baku. By the Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR  in February
1942, the commitment of more than 500 workers and employees of the oil industry  of Azerbaijan were awarded orders and medals. 
Operation Edelweiss  carried out by the German Wehrmacht  targeted Baku because of its importance as the energy (petroleum) dynamo
of the USSR.[6]  A fifth of all Azerbaijanis fought in the Second World War from 1941 to 1945. Approximately 681,000 people with
over 100,000 of them women went to the front, while the total population of Azerbaijan was 3.4 million at the time.[90]  Some
250,000 people from Azerbaijan were killed on the front. More than 130 Azerbaijanis were named Heroes of the Soviet Union.
Azerbaijani Major-General Azi Aslanov  was twice awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union.[91]

REPUBLIC ERA
Red Army  paratroops  during the Black January  tragedy in 1990.Following the politics of glasnost, initiated by Mikhail Gorbachev, civil unrest and ethnic strife grew in various regions of the
Soviet Union, including Nagorno-Karabakh,[92]  an autonomous region of the Azerbaijan SSR. The disturbances in Azerbaijan, in
response to Moscow's indifference to already heated conflict, resulted in calls for independence and secession, which culminated
in Black January  in Baku.[93]  Later in 1990, the Supreme Council of the Azerbaijan SSR  dropped the words "Soviet Socialist"
from the title, adopted the Declaration of Sovereignty of the Azerbaijan Republic and restored flag of the Azerbaijan Democratic
Republic as the state flag.[94]  On 18 October 1991, the Supreme Council of Azerbaijan adopted a Declaration of Independence which
was affirmed by a nationwide referendum in December 1991, when the Soviet Union officially ceased to exist on 26 December 1991.
[94]

The early years of independence were overshadowed by the Nagorno-Karabakh war  with the ethnic Armenian majority of
Nagorno-Karabakh backed by Armenia.[95]  By the end of hostilities in 1994, Armenians controlled up to 14–16 percent of
Azerbaijani territory, including Nagorno-Karabakh itself.[96][97]  During the war many atrocities were committed including the 
massacre  at Malibeyli and Gushchular, the Garadaghly, Agdaban  and the Khojaly massacres.[98][99]  Furthermore, an estimated
30,000 people had been killed and more than a million people had been displaced.[100]  Four United Nations Security Council 
Resolutions (822, 853, 874, and 884) demand for "the immediate withdrawal of all Armenian forces from all occupied territories of
Azerbaijan."[101]  Many Russians and Armenians left Azerbaijan during the 1990s.[102]  According to the 1970 census, there were
510,000 ethnic Russians  and 484,000 Armenians in Azerbaijan.[103]

In 1993, democratically elected president Abulfaz Elchibey  was overthrown by a military insurrection led by Colonel Surat
Huseynov, which resulted in the rise to power of the former leader of Soviet Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev.[104]  In 1994, Surat
Huseynov, by that time a prime minister, attempted another military coup against Heydar Aliyev, but Huseynov was arrested and
charged with treason.[105]  A year later, in 1995, another coup  was attempted against Aliyev, this time by the commander of the 
OMON  special unit, Rovshan Javadov. The coup was averted, resulting in the killing of the latter and disbanding of Azerbaijan's
OMON units.[106][107]  At the same time, the country was tainted by rampant corruption in the governing bureaucracy.[108]  In
October 1998, Aliyev was reelected for a second term. Despite the much improved economy, particularly with the exploitations of 
Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli oil field  and Shah Deniz gas field, Aliyev's presidency was criticized due to suspected vote fraud and
corruption.[109]

Ilham Aliyev, the son of Heydar Aliyev, assumed as the chairmen of the New Azerbaijan Party  as well as the office of presidency
when his father died in 2003. He was reelected to a third term  as president in October 2013. He then launched a crackdown on
opposition elements. In November, he put two prominent opponents on trial for inciting riots ten months earlier: Ilgar Mammadov,
the chairman of the opposition Republican Alternative (REAL); and Ilgar Mammadov, the deputy chairman of the New Equality Party
(Musavat). In addition the dissident Islamic theologian Taleh Bagirzada was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. The opposition
newspaper Azadiq  was closed down. Three men were sentenced to life in prison on charges of plotting attacks in Baku in a
conspiracy with Iran.[110]

GEOGRAPHY
Azerbaijan map of Köppen climate classification.Main articles: Geography of Azerbaijan, Environment of Azerbaijan, State reserves
of Azerbaijan, and National parks of AzerbaijanSee also: Extreme points of AzerbaijanCaucasus Mountains  in northern Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan is in the South Caucasus  region of Eurasia, straddling Western Asia  and Eastern Europe. It lies between latitudes 38° 
 and 42° N, and longitudes 44°  and 51° E. The total length of Azerbaijan's land borders  is 2,648 km (1,645 mi), of which
1007 kilometers are with Armenia, 756 kilometers with Iran, 480 kilometers with Georgia, 390 kilometers with Russia and
15 kilometers with Turkey.[111]  The coastline  stretches for 800 km (497 mi), and the length of the widest area of the
Azerbaijani section of the Caspian Sea is 456 km (283 mi).[111]  The territory of Azerbaijan extends 400 km (249 mi) from north to
south, and 500 km (311 mi) from west to east.

Three physical features dominate Azerbaijan: the Caspian Sea, whose shoreline forms a natural boundary to the east; the Greater
Caucasus  mountain range to the north; and the extensive flatlands at the country's center. There are also three mountain ranges,
the Greater and Lesser Caucasus, and the Talysh Mountains, together covering approximately 40 percent of the country.[112]  The
highest peak of Azerbaijan is mount Bazardüzü  (4,466 m), while the lowest point lies in the Caspian Sea (−28 m). Nearly half of
all the mud volcanoes  on Earth are concentrated in Azerbaijan, these volcanoes  were also among nominees for the New7Wonders of
Nature.[113]

The main water sources are surface waters. However, only 24 of the 8,350 rivers are greater than 100 km (62 mi) in length.[112] 
All the rivers drain into the Caspian Sea in the east of the country.[112]  The largest lake is Sarysu  (67 km²), and the longest
river is Kur  (1,515 km), which is transboundary. Azerbaijan's four main islands in the Caspian Sea have a combined area of over
thirty square kilometers.

Since the independence of Azerbaijan in 1991, the Azerbaijani government  has taken drastic measures to preserve the environment
of Azerbaijan. But national protection of the environment started to truly improve after 2001 when the state budget increased due
to new revenues provided by the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline. Within four years protected areas doubled and now make up eight
percent of the country's territory. Since 2001 the government has set up seven large reserves and almost doubled the sector of the
budget earmarked for environmental protection.[114]

LANDSCAPE
Main articles: Orography of Azerbaijan, Climate of Azerbaijan, and Water bodies of AzerbaijanMount Bazarduzu, the highest peak of
Azerbaijan, as seen from Mount Shahdagh
The landscape of Khinalug valley.Azerbaijan is home to a vast variety of landscapes. Over half of Azerbaijan's land mass consists
of mountain ridges, crests, yailas, and plateaus which rise up to hypsometric levels of 400–1000 meters (including the Middle and
Lower lowlands), in some places (Talis, Jeyranchol-Ajinohur and Langabiz-Alat foreranges) up to 100–120 meters, and others from
0–50 meters and up (Qobustan, Absheron). The rest of Azerbaijan's terrain consist of plains and lowlands. Hypsometric marks within
the Caucasus region vary from about −28 meters at the Caspian Sea shoreline up to 4,466 meters (Bazardüzü peak).[115]

The formation of climate in Azerbaijan is influenced particularly by cold arctic  air masses  of Scandinavian anticyclone,
temperate of Siberian  anticyclone, and Central Asian anticyclone.[116]  Azerbaijan's diverse landscape affects the ways air
masses enter the country.[116]  The Greater Caucasus protects the country from direct influences of cold air masses coming from
the north. That leads to the formation of subtropical climate  on most foothills and plains of the country. Meanwhile, plains and
foothills are characterized by high solar radiation  rates.

Nine out of 11 existing climate zones  are present in Azerbaijan.[117]  Both the absolute minimum temperature ( −33 °C or −27.4 °F 
 ) and the absolute maximum temperature ( 46 °C or 114.8 °F  ) were observed in Julfa  and Ordubad.[117]  The maximum annual 
precipitation  falls in Lankaran  (1,600 to 1,800 mm or 63 to 71 in) and the minimum in Absheron (200 to 350 mm or 7.9 to
13.8 in).[117]

Murovdag  is the highest mountain range  in the Lesser Caucasus.Rivers and lakes form the principal part of the water systems of
Azerbaijan, they were formed over a long geological timeframe and changed significantly throughout that period. This is
particularly evidenced by remnants of ancient rivers found throughout the country. The country's water systems are continually
changing under the influence of natural forces and human introduced industrial activities. Artificial rivers (canals) and ponds
are a part of Azerbaijan's water systems. In terms of water supply, Azerbaijan is below the average in the world with
approximately 100,000 cubic metres (3,531,467 cubic feet) per year of water per square kilometer.[117]  All big water reservoirs 
are built on Kur. The hydrography of Azerbaijan basically belongs to the Caspian Sea basin.

There are 8,350 rivers of various lengths within Azerbaijan. Only 24 rivers are over 100 kilometers long.[118]  The Kura  and Aras 
 are the most popular rivers in Azerbaijan, they run through the Kura-Aras Lowland. The rivers that directly flow into the Caspian
Sea, originate mainly from the north-eastern slope of the Major Caucasus and Talysh Mountains  and run along the Samur–Devechi and
Lankaran lowlands.

Yanar Dag, translated as "burning mountain", is a natural gas fire which blazes continuously on a hillside on the Absheron
Peninsula  on the Caspian Sea  near Baku, which itself is known as the "land of fire." Flames jet out into the air from a thin,
porous sandstone layer. It is a tourist attraction to visitors to the Baku area.

BIODIVERSITY
Main article: Wildlife of AzerbaijanFurther information: Fauna of Azerbaijan  and Flora of Azerbaijan
The Karabakh horse  is the national animal of Azerbaijan.The first reports on the richness and diversity of animal life in
Azerbaijan can be found in travel notes of Eastern travelers. Animal carvings on architectural monuments, ancient rocks and stones
survived up to the present times. The first information on the animal kingdom of Azerbaijan was collected during the visits of
naturalists to Azerbaijan in the 17th century.[112]  Unlike fauna, the concept of animal kingdom covers not only the types of
animals, but also the number of individual species.

There are 106 species of mammals, 97 species of fish, 363 species of birds, 10 species of amphibians and 52 species of reptiles
which have been recorded and classified in Azerbaijan.[112]  The national animal of Azerbaijan is the Karabakh horse, a
mountain-steppe racing and riding horse endemic to Azerbaijan. The Karabakh horse has a reputation for its good temper, speed,
elegance and intelligence. It is one of the oldest breeds, with ancestry dating to the ancient world. However today the horse is
an endangered species.[119]

Azerbaijan's flora consists of more than 4,500 species of higher plants. Due to the unique climate in Azerbaijan, the flora is
much richer in the number of species than the flora of the other republics of the South Caucasus.[120]  About 67 percent of the
species growing in the whole Caucasus  can be found in Azerbaijan.

POLITICS
Main article: Politics of AzerbaijanSee also: Elections in Azerbaijan  and Human rights in Azerbaijan
The son of former President Heydar Aliyev, Ilham Aliyev  succeeded his father and has remained in power since 2003.The structural
formation of Azerbaijan's political system was completed by the adoption of the new Constitution  on 12 November 1995. According
to the Article 23 of Constitution, the state symbols  of the Azerbaijan Republic are the flag, the coat of arms  and the national
anthem. The state power in Azerbaijan is limited only by law for internal issues, but for international affairs is additionally
limited by the provisions of international agreements.

The government of Azerbaijan is based on the separation of powers  among the legislative, executive and judicial  branches. The
legislative power is held by the unicameral  National Assembly  and the Supreme National Assembly in the Nakhchivan Autonomous
Republic. Parliamentary elections are held every five years, on the first Sunday of November. The Yeni Azerbaijan Party, and
independents loyal to the ruling government, currently hold almost all of the Parliament's 125 seats. During the 2010
Parliamentary election, the opposition parties, Musavat  and Azerbaijani Popular Front Party, failed to win a single seat.
European observers found numerous irregularities  in the run-up to the election and on election day.[121]

The executive power is held by the president, who is elected for a five-year term by direct elections, and the Prime Minister of
Azerbaijan. The president is authorized to form the Cabinet, a collective executive body, accountable to both the President and
the National Assembly. The Cabinet of Azerbaijan consists primarily of the Prime Minister, his Deputies and Ministers. The
president does not have the right to dissolve the National Assembly, but he has the right to veto its decisions. To override the
presidential veto, the parliament must have a majority of 95 votes. The judicial power is vested in the Constitutional Court, 
Supreme Court  and the Economic Court. The President nominates the judges in these courts.

The Security Council is the deliberative body under the president, and he organizes it according to the Constitution. It was
established on 10 April 1997. The administrative department is not a part of the president's office but manages the financial,
technical and pecuniary activities of both the president and his office.

Although Azerbaijan has held several elections since regaining its independence and it has many of the formal institutions of
democracy, it remains classified as "not free" (on border with "partly free") by Freedom House.[122][123]  In recent years, large
numbers of Azerbaijani journalists, bloggers, lawyers, human rights activists have been rounded up and jailed for their criticism
of President Aliyev and government authorities.[124]  A resolution adopted by the European Parliament in September 2015 described
Azerbaijan as "having suffered the greatest decline in democratic governance in all of Eurasia over the past ten years," noting as
well that its dialogue with the country on human rights has "not made any substantial progress."[125]

Azerbaijan has been harshly criticized for bribing foreign officials and diplomats for promoting its causes abroad and
legitimizing its elections at home, a practice which has been termed as 'caviar diplomacy'.[126][127][128][129]

FOREIGN RELATIONS
Main article: Foreign relations of AzerbaijanSee also: Azerbaijan and the European UnionVladimir Putin  in Azerbaijan in August
2013The short-lived Azerbaijan Democratic Republic succeeded in establishing diplomatic relations with six countries, sending
diplomatic representatives to Germany and Finland.[130]  The process of international recognition of Azerbaijan's independence
from the collapsing Soviet Union lasted roughly one year. The most recent country to recognize Azerbaijan was Bahrain, on 6
November 1996.[131]  Full diplomatic relations, including mutual exchanges of missions, were first established with Turkey,
Pakistan, the United States, Iran[130]  and Israel.[132]  Azerbaijan has placed a particular emphasis on its "Special Relationship
" with Turkey.[133][134]

Azerbaijan has diplomatic relations with 158 countries so far and holds membership in 38 international organizations.[14]  It
holds observer status in the Non-Aligned Movement  and World Trade Organization  and is a correspondent at the International
Telecommunication Union.[14]  On 9 May 2006 Azerbaijan was elected to membership in the newly established Human Rights Council  by
the United Nations General Assembly. The term of office began on 19 June 2006.[16]

Ilham Aliyev  attends the Caspian Sea Summit in Astrakhan, Russia, 29 September 2014Foreign policy priorities of Azerbaijan
include, first of all, the restoration of its territorial integrity; elimination of the consequences of the loss of
Nagorno-Karabakh and seven other regions of Azerbaijan;[135][136]  integration into European and Euro-Atlantic structure;
contribution to international security; cooperation with international organizations; regional cooperation and bilateral
relations; strengthening of defense capability; promotion of security by domestic policy means; strengthening of democracy;
preservation of the ethnic and religious tolerance; scientific, educational, and cultural policy and preservation of moral values;
economic and social development; enhancing internal and border security; and migration, energy, and transportation security
policy.[135]

The Azerbaijani government, in late 2007, stated that the long-standing dispute over the Armenian-occupied territory of
Nagorno-Karabakh is almost certain to spark a new war if it remains unresolved.[135]  The Government is in the process of
increasing its military budget. Furthermore, an attack by the Azerbaijani military in 2016 on Armenian villages in
Nagorno-Karabakh has caused physical damage and raised controversy over the future of peaceful relations between Azerbaijan and
its neighbor, Armenia.[137]

Azerbaijan is an active member of international coalitions fighting international terrorism. The country is contributing to
peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq. Azerbaijan is an active member of NATO's Partnership for Peace  program. It
also maintains good relations with the European Union  and could potentially one day apply for membership.[135]

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
Main article: Administrative divisions of AzerbaijanAzerbaijan is divided into 10 economic regions; 66 rayons  (rayonlar, singular rayon) and 77 cities (şəhərlər, singular şəhər) of
which 12 are under the direct authority of the republic.[138]  Moreover, Azerbaijan includes the Autonomous Republic  (muxtar
respublika) of Nakhchivan.[96]  The President of Azerbaijan  appoints the governors of these units, while the government of
Nakhchivan is elected and approved by the parliament of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic.

Absheron Economic Region * Absheron  (Abşeron)
 * Khizi  (Xızı)
 * Baku  (Bakı)
 * Sumqayit  (Sumqayıt)

Aran Economic Region * Aghjabadi  (Ağcabədi)
 * Aghdash  (Ağdaş)
 * Barda  (Bərdə)
 * Beylagan  (Beyləqan)
 * Bilasuvar  (Biləsuvar)
 * Goychay  (Göyçay)
 * Hajigabul  (Hacıqabul)
 * Imishli  (İmişli)
 * Kurdamir  (Kürdəmir)
 * Neftchala  (Neftçala)
 * Saatly  (Saatlı)
 * Sabirabad  (Sabirabad)
 * Salyan  (Salyan)
 * Ujar  (Ucar)
 * Yevlakh  (Yevlax)
 * Zardab  (Zərdab)
 * Mingachevir  (Mingəçevir)
 * Shirvan  (Şirvan)
 * Yevlakh  (Yevlax)

Daghlig Shirvan * Aghsu  (Ağsu)
 * Gobustan  (Qobustan)
 * Ismailly  (İsmayıllı)
 * Shamakhy  (Şamaxı)

Ganja-Gazakh * Aghstafa  (Ağstafa)
 * Dashkasan  (Daşkəsən)
 * Gadabay  (Gədəbəy)
 * Gazakh  (Qazax)
 * Goygol  (Göygöl)
 * Goranboy  (Goranboy)
 * Samukh  (Samux)
 * Shamkir  (Şəmkir)
 * Tovuz  (Tovuz)
 * Ganja  (Gəncə)
 * Naftalan  (Naftalan)

Guba-Khachmaz * Guba  (Quba)
 * Gusar  (Qusar)
 * Khachmaz  (Xaçmaz)
 * Shabran  (Şabran)
 * Siyazan  (Siyəzən)

Kalbajar-Lachin * Gubadly  (Qubadlı)
 * Kalbajar  (Kəlbəcər)
 * Lachin  (Laçın)
 * Zangilan  (Zəngilan)

Lankaran * Astara  (Astara)
 * Jalilabad  (Cəlilabad)
 * Lankaran  (Lənkəran)
 * Lerik  (Lerik)
 * Masally  (Masallı)

 * Yardimly  (Yardımlı)
 * Lankaran  (Lənkəran)

Nakhchivan * Babek  (Babək)
 * Julfa  (Culfa)
 * Kangarli  (Kəngərli)
 * Ordubad  (Ordubad)
 * Sadarak  (Sədərək)
 * Shahbuz  (Şahbuz)
 * Sharur  (Şərur)
 * Nakhchivan  (Naxçıvan)

Shaki-Zaqatala * Balakan  (Balakən)
 * Gabala  (Qəbələ)
 * Gakh  (Qax)
 * Oghuz  (Oğuz)
 * Shaki  (Şəki)
 * Zaqatala  (Zaqatala)
 * Shaki  (Şəki)

Yukhari Garabakh * Aghdam  (Ağdam)
 * Fuzuli  (Füzuli)
 * Jabrayil  (Cəbrayıl)
 * Khojaly  (Xocalı)
 * Khojavend  (Xocavənd)
 * Shusha  (Şuşa)
 * Tartar  (Tərtər)
 * Khankendi  (Xankəndi)
 * Shusha  (Şuşa)

Azerbaijan is divided into 10 economic regionsNote: The cities under the direct authority of the republic in italics.

MILITARY
Main article: Azerbaijani Armed ForcesAzerbaijani Navy  fleet during the 2011 military parade in Baku.
Azerbaijani Special Forces during military parade.The history of the modern Azerbaijan army dates back to Azerbaijan Democratic Republic  in 1918, when the National Army of the
newly formed Azerbaijan Democratic Republic was created on 26 June 1918.[139][140]  When Azerbaijan gained independence after the 
dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Armed Forces of the Republic of Azerbaijan were created according to the Law on the Armed
Forces of 9 October 1991.[141]  The original date of the establishment of the short-lived National Army is celebrated as Army Day
(26 June) in today's Azerbaijan.[142]  As of 2002, Azerbaijan had 95,000 active personnel in its armed forces. There are also
17,000 paramilitary troops.[143]  The armed forces have three branches: the Land Forces, the Air Forces  and the Navy.
Additionally the armed forces embrace several military sub-groups that can be involved in state defense when needed. These are the
 Internal Troops  of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the State Border Service, which includes the Coast Guard  as well.[96] 
The Azerbaijan National Guard  is a further paramilitary force. It operates as a semi-independent entity of the Special State
Protection Service, an agency subordinate to the President.[144]

Contingent from the Azerbaijani military during the Moscow Victory Day Parade, 9 May 2015Azerbaijan adheres to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe  and has signed all major international arms and weapons
treaties. Azerbaijan closely cooperates with NATO  in programs such as Partnership for Peace  and Individual Partnership Action
Plan. Azerbaijan has deployed 151 of its Peacekeeping Forces in Iraq and another 184 in Afghanistan.[145]

The defense budget of Azerbaijan for 2011 was set at US$3.1 billion.[146]  In addition to that, $1.36 billion was planned to be
used for the needs of the defense industry, which bring up the total military spending to billion.[146][147]  Azerbaijani
President Ilham Aliyev said on 26 June 2011 that the defence spending reached $3.3 billion that year.[148]

Azerbaijan's defense budget for 2013 is $3.7 billion.[149][150]

Azerbaijani defense industry manufactures small arms, artillery systems, tanks, armors and noctovision devices, aviation bombs,
pilotless vehicles, various military vehicles and military planes and helicopters.[151][152][153][154]

ECONOMY
Main article: Economy of AzerbaijanAfter gaining independence in 1991, Azerbaijan became a member of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Islamic Development Bank  and the Asian Development Bank.[155]  The banking system of
Azerbaijan consists of the Central Bank of Azerbaijan, commercial banks  and non-banking credit organizations. The National (now
Central) Bank was created in 1992 based on the Azerbaijan State Savings Bank, an affiliate of the former State Savings Bank of the
USSR. The Central Bank serves as Azerbaijan's central bank, empowered to issue the national currency, the Azerbaijani manat, and
to supervise all commercial banks. Two major commercial banks are UniBank  and the state-owned International Bank of Azerbaijan,
run by Dr. Jahangir Hajiyev.

Pushed up by spending and demand growth, the 2007 Q1  inflation rate reached 16.6%.[156]  Nominal incomes and monthly wages
climbed 29% and 25% respectively against this figure, but price increases in non-oil industry encouraged inflation.[156] 
Azerbaijan shows some signs of the so-called "Dutch disease" because of its fast-growing energy sector, which causes inflation and
makes non-energy exports more expensive.

In the early 2000s the chronically high inflation was brought under control. This led to the launch of a new currency, the new
Azerbaijani manat, on 1 January 2006, to cement the economic reforms and erase the vestiges of an unstable economy.[157][158]

In 2008, Azerbaijan was cited as one of the top 10 reformers by the World Bank's Doing Business Report.[159]

Azerbaijan led the world as the top reformer in 2007/08, with improvements on seven out of 10 indicators of regulatory reform.
Azerbaijan started operating a one-stop shop in January 2008 that halved the time, cost and number of procedures to start a
business. Business registrations increased by 40% in the first six months. Azerbaijan also eliminated the minimum loan cutoff of
$1,100, more than doubling the number of borrowers covered by the credit registry. Also, taxpayers can now file forms and pay
their taxes online. Azerbaijan's extensive reforms moved it far up the ranks, from 97 to 33 in the overall ease of doing business.

Azerbaijan is also ranked 57th in the Global Competitiveness Report  for 2010–2011, above other CIS countries.[160]  By 2012 the 
GDP  of Azerbaijan had increased 20-fold from to its 1995 level.[161]

ENERGY
Main article: Energy in AzerbaijanFurther information: Petroleum industry in Azerbaijan
A pumping unit  for the mechanical extraction of oil on the outskirts of Baku.Two-thirds of Azerbaijan is rich in oil and natural
gas.[162]  The region of the Lesser Caucasus  accounts for most of the country's gold, silver, iron, copper, titanium, chromium, 
manganese, cobalt, molybdenum, complex ore  and antimony.[162]  In September 1994, a 30-year contract was signed between the 
State
Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic  (SOCAR) and 13 oil companies, among them Amoco, BP, ExxonMobil, Lukoil  and Statoil.[155]  As
Western oil companies are able to tap deepwater oilfields  untouched by the Soviet exploitation, Azerbaijan is considered one of
the most important spots in the world for oil exploration  and development.[163]  Meanwhile, the State Oil Fund of Azerbaijan  was
established as an extra-budgetary fund to ensure macroeconomic  stability, transparency in the management of oil revenue, and
safeguarding of resources for future generations.

Azeriqaz, a sub-company of SOCAR, intends to ensure full gasification of the country by 2021.[164]

AGRICULTURE
Main article: Agriculture in AzerbaijanAzerbaijan has the largest agricultural basin in the region. About 54.9 percent of
Azerbaijan is agricultural land.[111]  At the beginning of 2007 there were 4,755,100 hectares of utilized agricultural area.[165] 
In the same year the total wood resources counted 136 million m³.[165]  Azerbaijan's agricultural scientific research institutes
are focused on meadows and pastures, horticulture and subtropical  crops, green vegetables, viticulture  and wine-making, cotton
growing and medicinal plants.[166]  In some areas it is profitable to grow grain, potatoes, sugar beets, cotton[167]  and tobacco.
Livestock, dairy products, and wine and spirits  are also important farm products. The Caspian fishing industry  concentrates on
the dwindling stocks of sturgeon  and beluga. In 2002 the Azerbaijani merchant marine  had 54 ships.[168]

Some products previously imported from abroad have begun to be produced locally. Among them are Coca Cola by Coca Cola Bottlers
LTD, beer by Baki-Kastel, parquet by Nehir and oil pipes by EUPEC Pipe Coating Azerbaijan.[169]

TOURISM
Main article: Tourism in AzerbaijanShahdag Mountain Resort  is the country's largest winter resort.Tourism is an important part of
the economy of Azerbaijan. The country was a well-known tourist spot in the 1980s. However, the fall of the Soviet Union, and the
Nagorno-Karabakh War during the 1990s, damaged the tourist industry and the image of Azerbaijan as a tourist destination.[170]

It was not until the 2000s that the tourism industry began to recover, and the country has since experienced a high rate of growth
in the number of tourist visits and overnight stays.[171]  In the recent years, Azerbaijan has also becoming a popular destination
for religious, spa, and health care tourism.[172]  During winter, the Shahdag Mountain Resort  offers skiing with state of the art
facilities.

The government of Azerbaijan  has set the development of Azerbaijan as an elite tourist destination as a top priority. It is a
national strategy to make tourism a major, if not the single largest, contributor to the Azerbaijani economy.[173]  These
activities are regulated by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Azerbaijan.

TRANSPORTATION
Main articles: Transportation in Azerbaijan  and Rail transport in AzerbaijanThe convenient location of Azerbaijan on the
crossroad of major international traffic arteries, such as the Silk Road  and the south–north corridor, highlights the strategic
importance of transportation sector for the country's economy.[174]  The transport sector in the country includes roads, railways,
aviation, and maritime transport.

Azerbaijan is also an important economic hub in the transportation of raw materials. The Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan pipeline  (BTC)
became operational in May 2006 and extends more than 1,774 kilometers through the territories of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey.
The BTC is designed to transport up to 50 million tons of crude oil annually and carries oil from the Caspian Sea oilfields to
global markets.[175]  The South Caucasus Pipeline, also stretching through the territory of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey, became
operational at the end of 2006 and offers additional gas supplies to the European market from the Shah Deniz gas field. Shah Deniz
is expected to produce up to 296 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year.[176]  Azerbaijan also plays a major role in the
EU-sponsored Silk Road Project.

In 2002, the Azerbaijani government established the Ministry of Transport with a broad range of policy and regulatory functions.
In the same year, the country became a member of the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic.[177]  The highest priority being;
upgrading the transport network and transforming transportation services into one of the key comparative advantages of the
country, as this would be highly conducive to the development of other sectors of the economy.

In 2012, the construction of Kars–Tbilisi–Baku railway  expected to provide transportation between Asia and Europe through
connecting the railways of China and Kazakhstan in the east with Turkey's Marmaray  to the European railway system in the west. 
Broad-gauge  railways in 2010 stretched for 2,918 km (1,813 mi) and electrified railways numbered 1,278 km (794 mi). By 2010,
there were 35 airports and one heliport.[96]

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Main articles: Communications in Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan National Aerospace Agency, and List of Azerbaijani inventions and
discoveriesShamakhi Astrophysical ObservatoryIn the 21st century, a new oil and gas boom helped to improve the situation in
Azerbaijan's science and technology sectors, and the government launched a campaign aimed at modernization and innovation. The
government estimates that profits from the information technology and communication industry will grow and become comparable with
those from oil production.[178]

Azerbaijan has a large and steadily growing Internet sector, mostly uninfluenced by the global financial crisis; rapid growth is
forecast for at least five more years.[179]

The country has also been making progress in developing its telecoms sector. The Ministry of Communications & Information
Technologies (MCIT), as well as being an operator through its role in Aztelekom, is both a policy-maker and regulator. Public pay
phones are available for local calls and require the purchase of a token from the telephone exchange or some shops and kiosks.
Tokens allow a call of indefinite duration. As of 2009[update], there were 1,397,000 main telephone lines[180]  and 1,485,000
internet users.[181]  There are four GSM  providers: Azercell, Bakcell, Azerfon (Nar Mobile), Nakhtel  mobile network operators
and one CDMA.

In the 21st century a number of prominent Azerbaijani geodynamics  and geotectonics  scientists, inspired by the fundamental works
of Elchin Khalilov  and others, designed hundreds of earthquake prediction stations and earthquake-resistant buildings that now
constitute the bulk of The Republican Center of Seismic Service.[182][183][184]

The Azerbaijan National Aerospace Agency  launched its first satellite AzerSat 1  into orbit on 7 February 2013 from Guiana Space
Centre  in French Guiana at orbital positions 46° East.[185][186][187]  The satellite will cover Europe and significant part of
Asian countries and Africa and will have transmission for TV, radio broadcasting and the internet.[188]  The launch of its own
satellite on orbit is Azerbaijan's first action in realizing prospective projects to turn itself into a country with a space
industry.[189][190]

DEMOGRAPHICS
Main article: Demographics of AzerbaijanFurther information: Ethnic minorities in AzerbaijanEthnic composition (2009)[191]
Azerbaijani91.60%Lezgian2.02%Armenian1.35%Russian1.34%Talysh1.26%Other nations2.43%From the total population of 9,165,000 people
as of July 2011, nearly 52% was urban population, the remaining 48% was the rural population.[192]  51% of the total population
were female.[192]  The sex ratio  for total population in that year was therefore 0.97 males per female.[96]

The 2011 population growth-rate was 0.85%, compared to 1.09% worldwide.[96]  A significant factor restricting the population
growth is rather a high level of migration. In 2011 Azerbaijan saw migration of −1.14/1,000 people.[96]

The Azerbaijani diaspora  is found in 42 countries[193]  and in turn there are many centers for ethnic minorities inside
Azerbaijan, including the German cultural society "Karelhaus", Slavic  cultural center, Azerbaijani-Israeli community, Kurdish 
cultural center, International Talysh  Association, Lezgin  national center "Samur", Azerbaijani-Tatar  community, Crimean Tatars 
society, etc.[194]

The ethnic composition of the population according to the 2009 population census: 91.60% Azerbaijanis, 2.02% Lezgians, 1.35% 
Armenians  (almost all Armenians live in the break-away region of Nagorno-Karabakh), 1.34% Russians, 1.26% Talysh, 0.56% Avars,
0.43% Turks, 0.29% Tatars, 0.28% Tats, 0.24% Ukrainians, 0.14% Tsakhurs, 0.11% Georgians, 0.10% Jews, 0.07% Kurds, other 0.21%.

Iranian Azerbaijanis  are by far the largest minority in Iran. The number of ethnic Azerbaijanis in Iran furthermore far outnumber
those in neighboring Azerbaijan. The CIA World Factbook estimates Iranian Azerbaijanis as comprising at least 16% of Iran's
population.[195]

URBANIZATION
Main article: List of cities in AzerbaijanIn total, Azerbaijan has 77 cities, 64 smaller rayon-class cities, and one special legal status city. These are followed by 257
urban-type settlements and 4,620 villages.[196]

LANGUAGE
Main article: Languages of AzerbaijanThe official language is Azerbaijani, which is spoken by approximately 92% of the population as a mother tongue.[197]  It belongs
to the Turkic  language family. Russian and Armenian  are also spoken, and each are the mother tongue of around 1.5% of the
population respectively.[197]  Russian and English play significant roles as second or third languages of education and
communication.[citation needed]  There are a dozen other minority languages spoken natively in the country.[198]  Avar, Budukh,
[199]  Georgian, Juhuri,[199]  Khinalug,[199]  Kryts,[199]  Lezgian, Rutul,[199]  Talysh, Tat,[199]  Tsakhur,[199]  and Udi[199] 
are all spoken by small minorities. Some of these language communities are very small and their numbers are decreasing.[200] 
Armenian is almost exclusively spoken in the break-away Nagorno-Karabakh region.

RELIGION
Religions in Azerbaijan[201]Islam97.4%Christianity1.1%None1.0%Others0.5%Main articles: Religion in Azerbaijan  and Freedom of
religion in Azerbaijan
The Bibi-Heybat Mosque  before its destruction by the Bolsheviks  in 1936. The mosque was built over the tomb of a descendant of 
Muhammad.[202]Around 98% of the population are Muslims.[203]  92% of the Muslims are Shia Muslims  and 8% Sunni Muslims,[204]  and the Republic
of Azerbaijan has the second highest Shia population percentage in the world.[205]  Other faiths are practised by the country's
various ethnic groups. Under article 48 of its Constitution, Azerbaijan is a secular state  and ensures religious freedom. In a
2006–2008 Gallup  poll, only 21% of respondents from Azerbaijan stated that religion is an important part of their daily lives.
This makes Azerbaijan the least religious Muslim-majority country in the world[206]

Of the nation's religious minorities, Christians who estimated 280,000 (3.1%)[207]  are mostly Russian  and Georgian  Orthodox 
and Armenian Apostolic  (almost all Armenians live in the break-away region of Nagorno-Karabakh).[96]  In 2003, there were 250 
Roman Catholics.[208]  Other Christian denominations as of 2002 include Lutherans, Baptists  and Molokans.[209]  There is also a
small Protestant  community.[210][211]  Azerbaijan also has an ancient Jewish  population with a 2,500-year history; Jewish
organizations estimate that 10,000–20,000 Jews remain in Azerbaijan.[212][213][214][215]  Azerbaijan also is home to members of
the Bahá'í, Hare Krishna  and Jehovah's Witnesses  communities, as well as adherents of the other religious communities.[209] 
Some religious communities have been unofficially restricted from religious freedom. A U.S. State Department  report on the matter
mentions detention of members of certain Muslim and Christian groups, and many groups have difficulty registering with the SCWRA.
[216]

EDUCATION
Main article: Education in Azerbaijan
Classroom in Dunya SchoolA relatively high percentage of Azerbaijanis have obtained some form of higher education, most notably in
scientific and technical subjects.[217]  In the Soviet era, literacy and average education levels rose dramatically from their
very low starting point, despite two changes in the standard alphabet, from Perso-Arabic script  to Latin  in the 1920s and from
Roman to Cyrillic  in the 1930s. According to Soviet data, 100 percent of males and females (ages nine to forty-nine) were
literate in 1970.[217]  According to the United Nations Development Program  Report 2009, the literacy rate in Azerbaijan is 99.5
percent.[218]

Since independence, one of the first laws that Azerbaijan's Parliament passed to disassociate itself from the Soviet Union was to
adopt a modified-Latin alphabet  to replace Cyrillic.[219]  Other than that the Azerbaijani system has undergone little structural
change. Initial alterations have included the reestablishment of religious education (banned during the Soviet period) and
curriculum changes that have reemphasized the use of the Azerbaijani language and have eliminated ideological content. In addition
to elementary schools, the education institutions include thousands of preschools, general secondary schools, and vocational
schools, including specialized secondary schools and technical schools. Education through the eighth grade is compulsory.

CULTURE
The Azerbaijani carpet  and Kalaghai, a UNESCO  Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage of Humanity.Main articles: Culture of
Azerbaijan  and Literature of AzerbaijanThe culture of Azerbaijan has developed as a result of many influences. Today, national
traditions are well preserved in the country despite Western influences, including globalized  on consumer culture. Some of the
main elements of the Azerbaijani culture are: music, literature, folk dances and art, cuisine, architecture, cinematography and 
Novruz Bayram. The latter is derived from the traditional celebration of the New Year in the ancient Iranian religion of 
Zoroastrianism. Novruz is a family holiday.[220]

Azerbaijan folk consists of Azerbaijanis, the representative part of society, as well as of nations and ethnic groups, compactly
living in various areas of the country. Azerbaijani national and traditional dresses are the Chokha  and Papakhi. There are radio
broadcasts in Russian, Armenian, Georgian, Kurdish, Lezgian  and Talysh  languages, which are financed from the state budget.[194] 
 Some local radio stations in Balakan  and Khachmaz  organize broadcasts in Avar  and Tat.[194]  In Baku several newspapers are
published in Russian, Kurdish (Dengi Kurd), Lezgian (Samur) and Talysh languages.[194]  Jewish society "Sokhnut" publishes the
newspaper Aziz.[194]

MUSIC AND FOLK DANCES
Main articles: Music of Azerbaijan  and Azerbaijani dancesUzeyir Hajibeyov  merged traditional Azerbaijani music  with Western
styles in the early 20th century.Music of Azerbaijan builds on folk traditions  that reach back nearly a thousand years.[221]  For centuries Azerbaijani music has
evolved under the badge of monody, producing rhythmically diverse melodies.[222]  Azerbaijani music has a branchy mode  system,
where chromatization  of major and minor  scales  is of great importance.[222]  Among national musical instruments there are 14 
string instruments, eight percussion instruments and six wind instruments.[223]  According to The Grove Dictionary of Music and
Musicians, "in terms of ethnicity, culture and religion the Azerbaijani are musically much closer to Iran than Turkey."[224]

The Azerbaijani Mugam, a UNESCO  Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage of Humanity, 16th-century miniature of Nizami Ganjavi's 
Khosrow and Shirin  tragic romance.Mugham, meykhana  and ashiq art  are among the many musical traditions of Azerbaijan. Mugham is usually a suite with poetry and
instrumental interludes. When performing mugham, the singers have to transform their emotions into singing and music. In contrast
to the mugham traditions of Central Asian countries, Azerbaijani mugham is more free-form and less rigid; it is often compared to
the improvised field of jazz.[225]  UNESCO  proclaimed the Azerbaijani mugham tradition a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible
Heritage of Humanity  on 7 November 2003. Meykhana is a kind of traditional Azerbaijani distinctive folk unaccompanied song,
usually performed by several people improvising on a particular subject.

Ashiq combines poetry, storytelling, dance and vocal and instrumental music into a traditional performance art that stands as a
symbol of Azerbaijani culture. It is a mystic troubadour or traveling bard who sings and plays the saz. This tradition has its
origin in the Shamanistic  beliefs of ancient Turkic peoples.[226]  Ashiqs' songs are semi-improvised around common bases.
Azerbaijan's ashiq art was included in the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage  by the UNESCO on 30 September 2009.[227]

Since the mid-1960s, Western-influenced Azerbaijani pop music, in its various forms, that has been growing in popularity in
Azerbaijan, while genres as rock  and hip hop  of alternative music genres are encouraged. Azerbaijani pop and Azerbaijani folk
music  arose with the international popularity of performers like Alim Qasimov, Rashid Behbudov, Vagif Mustafazadeh, Muslim
Magomayev, Shovkat Alakbarova  and Rubaba Muradova.[228]  Azerbaijan is an enthusiastic participant in the Eurovision Song
Contest. Azerbaijan made its debut appearance at the 2008 Eurovision Song Contest. The country's entry  gained the third place in
2009 and fifth the following year.[229]  Ell and Nikki  won the first place at the Eurovision Song Contest 2011  with the song "
Running Scared", entitling Azerbaijan to host the contest in 2012, in Baku.[230][231]  They have never missed a Grand Final.

There are dozens of Azerbaijani folk dances. They are performed at formal celebrations and the dancers wear national clothes like
the Chokha, which is well-preserved within the national dances. Most dances have a very fast rhythm. The national dance shows the
characteristics of the Azerbaijani nation.

LITERATURE
Main article: Azerbaijani literature
Painting of Khurshidbanu Natavan, one of the most distinguished Azerbaijani poets. She was also the daughter of the last ruler of
the Karabakh Khanate.Among the medieval authors born within the territorial limits of modern Azerbaijani Republic was Persian poet
and philosopher Nizami, called Ganjavi after his place of birth, Ganja, who was the author of the Khamseh  ("The Quintuplet"),
composed of five romantic poems, including "The Treasure of Mysteries," "Khosrow and Shīrīn," and "Leyli and Mejnūn."[232]

The earliest known figure in Azerbaijani literature was Izzeddin Hasanoglu, who composed a divan  consisting of Persian and Turkic
 ghazals.[233][234]  In Persian ghazals he used his pen-name, while his Turkic ghazals were composed under his own name of
Hasanoghlu.[233]

Classical literature in Azerbaijani was formed in 14th century based on the various dialect Early Middle Ages dialects of Tabriz 
and Shirvan. Among the poets of this period were Gazi Burhanaddin, Haqiqi  (pen-name of Jahan-shah Qara Qoyunlu), and Habibi.[235] 
 The end of the 14th century was also the period of starting literary activity of Imadaddin Nesimi,[236]  one of the greatest 
Turkic[237][238][239]  Hurufi  mystical poets of the late 14th and early 15th centuries[240]  and one of the most prominent early
divan masters in Turkic literary history,[240]  who also composed poetry in Persian[238][241]  and Arabic.[240]  The divan and
ghazal styles were further developed by poets Qasim al-Anvar, Fuzuli  and Khatai  (pen-name of Safavid  Shah Ismail I).

The Book of Dede Korkut  consists of two manuscripts copied in the 16th century,[242]  was not written earlier than the 15th
century.[243][244]  It is a collection of 12 stories reflecting the oral tradition of Oghuz nomads.[244]  The 16th-century poet,
Muhammed Fuzuli produced his timeless philosophical and lyrical Qazals  in Arabic, Persian, and Azerbaijani. Benefiting immensely
from the fine literary traditions of his environment, and building upon the legacy of his predecessors, Fizuli was destined to
become the leading literary figure of his society. His major works include The Divan of Ghazals  and The Qasidas. In the same
century, Azerbaijani literature further flourished with the development of Ashik  (Azerbaijani: Aşıq) poetic genre of bards.
During the same period, under the pen-name of Khatāī (Arabic: خطائی‎‎ for sinner) Shah Ismail I wrote about 1400 verses in
Azerbaijani,[245]  which were later published as his Divan. A unique literary style known as qoshma  (Azerbaijani: qoşma  for 
improvization) was introduced in this period, and developed by Shah Ismail and later by his son and successor, Shah Tahmasp I.

In the span of the 17th and 18th centuries, Fizuli's unique genres as well Ashik  poetry were taken up by prominent poets and
writers such as Qovsi of Tabriz, Shah Abbas Sani, Agha Mesih Shirvani, Nishat, Molla Vali Vidadi, Molla Panah Vagif, Amani, Zafar 
and others. Along with Turks, Turkmens  and Uzbeks, Azerbaijanis  also celebrate the Epic of Koroglu  (from Azerbaijani: kor oğlu 
for blind man's son), a legendary folk hero.[246]  Several documented versions of Koroglu epic remain at the Institute for
Manuscripts of the National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan.[234]

Modern literature in Azerbaijan is based on the Shirvani dialect mainly, while in Iran it is based on the Tabrizi one. The first
newspaper in Azerbaijani, Akinchi  was published in 1875. In the mid-19th century, it was taught in the schools of Baku, Ganja, 
Shaki, Tbilisi, and Yerevan. Since 1845, it has also been taught in the University of Saint Petersburg  in Russia.

FOLK ART
Main article: Azerbaijani folk art
Traditional Azerbaijani clothing and musical instruments.Azerbaijanis have a rich and distinctive culture, a major part of which
is decorative  and applied art. This form of art is represented by a wide range of handicrafts, such as chasing, jeweler,
engraving in metal, carving in wood, stone and bone, carpet-making, lasing, pattern weaving and printing, knitting and embroidery.
Each of these types of decorative art, evidence of the and endowments of the Azerbaijan nation, is very much in favor here. Many
interesting facts pertaining to the development of arts and crafts in Azerbaijan were reported by numerous merchants, travelers
and diplomats who had visited these places at different times.

The Azerbaijani carpet  is a traditional handmade textile of various sizes, with dense texture and a pile or pile-less surface,
whose patterns are characteristic of Azerbaijan's many carpet-making regions. In November 2010 the Azerbaijani carpet was
proclaimed a Masterpiece of Intangible Heritage  by UNESCO.[247][248]

Handwork coppery in Lahic.Azerbaijan has been since the ancient times known as a center of a large variety of crafts. The
archeological dig on the territory of Azerbaijan testifies to the well developed agriculture, stock raising, metal working,
pottery, ceramics, and carpet-weaving that date as far back as to the 2nd millennium BC. Archeological sites in Dashbulaq,
Hasansu, Zayamchai, and Tovuzchai uncovered from the BTC pipeline have revealed early Iron Age artifacts.[249]

Azerbaijani carpets can be categorized under several large groups and a multitude of subgroups. Scientific research of the
Azerbaijani carpet is connected with the name of Latif Kerimov, a prominent scientist and artist. It was his classification that
related the four large groups of carpets with the four geographical zones of Azerbaijan, Guba-Shirvan, Ganja-Kazakh, Karabakh and
Tabriz.[250]

CUISINE
Main article: Azerbaijani cuisineDushbara, a traditional Azerbaijani meal.The traditional cuisine is famous for an abundance of
vegetables and greens used seasonally in the dishes. Fresh herbs, including mint, cilantro (coriander), dill, basil, parsley,
tarragon, leeks, chives, thyme, marjoram, green onion, and watercress, are very popular and often accompany main dishes on the
table. Climatic diversity and fertility of the land are reflected in the national dishes, which are based on fish from the 
Caspian
Sea, local meat (mainly mutton and beef), and an abundance of seasonal vegetables and greens. Saffron-rice plov  is the flagship
food in Azerbaijan and black tea  is the national beverage.[251]  Azerbaijanis often use traditional armudu  (pear-shaped) glass
as they have very strong tea culture.[252][253]  Popular traditional dishes include bozbash  (lamb soup that exists in several
regional varieties with the addition of different vegetables), qutab  (fried turnover with a filling of greens or minced meat) and
 dushbara  (sort of dumplings of dough filled with ground meat and flavor).

ARCHITECTURE
Main article: Architecture of AzerbaijanMomine Khatun Mausoleum  in Nakhchivan  built in the 12th centuryAzerbaijani architecture
typically combines elements of East  and West.[254]  Many ancient architectural treasures such as the Maiden Tower  and Palace of
the Shirvanshahs  in the Walled City of Baku  survive in modern Azerbaijan. Entries submitted on the UNESCO World Heritage 
tentative list include the Ateshgah of Baku, Momine Khatun Mausoleum, Hirkan National Park, Binegadi National Park, Lökbatan Mud
Volcano, Baku Stage Mountain, Caspian Shore Defensive Constructions, Shusha National Reserve, Ordubad National Reserve  and the 
Palace of Shaki Khans.[255][256]

Among other architectural treasures are Quadrangular Castle  in Mardakan, Parigala  in Yukhary Chardaglar, a number of bridges
spanning the Aras River, and several mausoleums. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, little monumental architecture was created,
but distinctive residences were built in Baku and elsewhere. Among the most recent architectural monuments, the Baku subways  are
noted for their lavish decor.[257]

The task for modern Azerbaijani architecture is diverse application of modern aesthetics, the search for an architect's own
artistic style and inclusion of the existing historico-cultural environment. Major projects such as Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center,
 Flame Towers, Baku Crystal Hall, Baku White City  and SOCAR Tower  have transformed the country's skyline and promotes its
contemporary identity.[258][259]

VISUAL ART
Main article: Visual arts of Azerbaijan
A miniature painting  of a battle scene on the walls of the Palace of Shaki Khans, 18th century, city of Shaki.Azerbaijani art
includes one of the oldest art objects in the world, which were discovered as Gamigaya Petroglyphs  in the territory of Ordubad
Rayon  are dated back to the 1st to 4th centuries BC. About 1500 dislodged and carved rock paintings with images of deer, goats,
bulls, dogs, snakes, birds, fantastic beings and also people, carriages and various symbols had been found out on basalt rocks.
[260]  Norwegian ethnographer  and adventurer Thor Heyerdahl  was convinced that people from the area went to Scandinavia  in
about 100 AD and took their boat building skills with them, and transmuted them into the Viking boats in Northern Europe.[261]
[262]

Over the centuries, Azerbaijani art has gone through many stylistic changes. Azerbaijani painting is traditionally characterized
by a warmth of colour and light, as exemplified in the works of Azim Azimzade  and Bahruz Kangarli, and a preoccupation with
religious figures and cultural motifs.[263]  Azerbaijani painting enjoyed preeminence in Caucasus for hundreds of years, from the 
Romanesque  and Ottoman  periods, and through the Soviet  and Baroque  periods, the latter two of which saw fruition in
Azerbaijan. Other notable artists who fall within these periods include Sattar Bahlulzade, Togrul Narimanbekov, Tahir Salahov, 
Alakbar Rezaguliyev, Mirza Gadim Iravani, Mikayil Abdullayev  and Boyukagha Mirzazade.[264]

CINEMA
Scene from the Azerbaijani film In the Kingdom of Oil and Millions, 1916Main articles: Cinema of Azerbaijan, Azerbaijani animation
, and Television in AzerbaijanThe film industry in Azerbaijan dates back to 1898. In fact, Azerbaijan was among the first
countries involved in cinematography.[265]  Therefore, it's not surprising that this apparatus soon showed up in Baku  – at the
start of the 20th century, this bay town on the Caspian  was producing more than 50 percent of the world's supply of oil. Just
like today, the oil industry attracted foreigners eager to invest and to work.[266]  In 1919, during the Azerbaijan Democratic
Republic, a documentary The Celebration of the Anniversary of Azerbaijani Independence  was filmed on Azerbaijan's independence
day, 28 May, and premiered in June 1919 at several theatres in Baku.[267]  After the Soviet power was established in 1920, Nariman
Narimanov, Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee of Azerbaijan, signed a decree nationalizing Azerbaijan's cinema. This also
influenced the creation of Azerbaijani animation.[267]

In 1991, after Azerbaijan gained its independence from the Soviet Union, the first Baku International Film Festival East-West was
held in Baku. In December 2000, the former President of Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev, signed a decree proclaiming 2 August to be the
professional holiday of filmmakers of Azerbaijan. Today Azerbaijani filmmakers are again dealing with issues similar to those
faced by cinematographers prior to the establishment of the Soviet Union in 1920. Once again, both choice of content and
sponsorship of films are largely left up to the initiative of the filmmaker.[265]

MEDIA AND MEDIA FREEDOM
Main articles: Media of Azerbaijan  and Media freedom in AzerbaijanThere are three state-owned television channels: AzTV, Idman TV  and Medeniyyet TV. One public channel and 6 private channels: 
İctimai Television, ANS TV, Space TV, Lider TV, Azad Azerbaijan TV, Xazar TV  and Region TV.

Print and broadcast media in Azerbaijan are almost wholly under control of the ruling Aliyev family, eventually through friendly
intermediaries.[268]  Ownership opacity is backed by law. Azerbaijan hosts 9 national TV stations (of which a public service
broadcaster and 3 more state-run channels), over 12 regional TV stations, 25 radio channels, over 30 daily newspapers. Opposition
media manages to work on the perpetual brink of survival.[269]

HUMAN RIGHTS IN AZERBAIJAN
Main article: Human rights in AzerbaijanThe Constitution of Azerbaijan  claims to guarantee freedom of speech, but this is denied in practice. After several years of
decline in press and media freedom, in 2014 the media environment in Azerbaijan deteriorated fast under a governmental campaign to
silence any opposition and criticism, even while the country led the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe 
(May–November 2014). Spurious legal charges and impunity in violence against journalists have remained the norm.[270]  All foreign
broadcasts are banned in the country.[269]

According to the 2013 Freedom House  Freedom of the Press report, Azerbaijan's press freedom status is "not free," and Azerbaijan
ranks 177th out of 196 countries.[271]

BBC, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty  and Voice of America  are banned in Azerbaijan.[272]

During the last few years, three journalists were killed and several prosecuted in trials described as unfair by international
human rights organizations. Azerbaijan has the biggest number of journalists imprisoned in Europe and Central Asia in 2015,
according to the Committee to Protect Journalists, and is the 5th most censored country in the world, ahead of Iran and China.
[273]

A report by an Amnesty International  researcher in October 2015 points to '...the severe deterioration of human rights in
Azerbaijan over the past few years. Sadly Azerbaijan has been allowed to get away with unprecedented levels of repression and in
the process almost wipe out its civil society'.[274]  Amnesty's 2015/16 annual report[275]  on the country stated ' ...
persecution of political dissent continued. Human rights organizations remained unable to resume their work. At least 18 prisoners
of conscience remained in detention at the end of the year. Reprisals against independent journalists and activists persisted both
in the country and abroad, while their family members also faced harassment and arrests. International human rights monitors were
barred and expelled from the country. Reports of torture and other ill-treatment persisted.'

SPORTS
Main article: Sport in AzerbaijanShakhriyar Mamedyarov  was the 2013 World Rapid Chess  and two-time European Team Chess 
champion.Sport in Azerbaijan has ancient roots, and even now, both traditional and modern sports are still practiced. Freestyle wrestling 
has been traditionally regarded as Azerbaijan's national sport, in which Azerbaijan won up to fourteen medals, including four
golds since joining the National Olympic Committee. Currently, the most popular sports include football  and chess.[276]

Football is the most popular sport in Azerbaijan, and the Association of Football Federations of Azerbaijan  with 9,122 registered
players, is the largest sporting association in the country.[277][278]  The national football team  of Azerbaijan demonstrates
relatively low performance in the international arena compared to the nation football clubs. The most successful Azerbaijani
football clubs are Neftchi Baku, Inter Baku, Qarabağ, and Khazar Lankaran. In 2012, Neftchi Baku became the first Azerbaijani team
to advance to the group stage of a European competition, beating APOEL  of Cyprus 4-2 on aggregate in the play-off round of the 
2012-13 UEFA Europa League.[279][280]  In 2014, Qarabağ became the second Azerbaijani club advancing to the group stage of UEFA
Europa League. Futsal  is another popular sport in Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijan national futsal team  reached fourth place in the 
2010 UEFA Futsal Championship, while domestic club Araz Naxçivan  clinched bronze medals at the 2009–10 UEFA Futsal Cup  and 
2013–14 UEFA Futsal Cup.[281]  Azerbaijan is the main sponsor of Spanish football club Atlético de Madrid, a partnership that the
club describes should 'promote the image of Azerbaijan in the world'.[282]

Azerbaijan is one of the traditional powerhouses of world chess,[283]  having hosted many international chess tournaments and
competitions and became European Team Chess Championship  winners in 2009 and 2013.[284][285][286]  Notable chess players from
country's chess schools that made a great impact on the game in world, includes Teimour Radjabov, Shahriyar Mammadyarov, Vladimir
Makogonov, Vugar Gashimov  and former World Chess Champion  Garry Kasparov. As of 2014[update], country's home of Shamkir Chess  a
category 22 event and one of the highest rated tournaments of all time.[287]  Backgammon  also plays a major role in Azerbaijani
culture.[288]  The game is very popular in Azerbaijan and is widely played among the local public.[289]  There are also different
variations of backgammon developed and analyzed by Azerbaijani experts.[290]

Baku National Stadium  was used for the first European Games  in June 2015.Azerbaijan is one of the leading volleyball countries
in the world and its Azerbaijan Women's Volleyball Super League  is one of strongest women leagues in world. Its women's national
team came fourth at the 2005 European Championship.[291]  Over the last years, clubs like Rabita Baku  and Azerrail Baku  achieved
great success at European cups.[292]  Azerbaijani volleyball players include likes of Valeriya Korotenko, Oksana Parkhomenko, 
Inessa Korkmaz, Natalya Mammadova  and Alla Hasanova.

Azerbaijan has a Formula One race-track  and country hosted its first Formula One  Grand Prix on 19 June 2016.[293]

Other well-known Azerbaijani athletes are Namig Abdullayev, Toghrul Asgarov, Rovshan Bayramov, Sharif Sharifov, Mariya Stadnik 
and Farid Mansurov  in wrestling, Elnur Mammadli, Elkhan Mammadov  and Nazim Huseynov  in judo, Rafael Aghayev  in karate, 
Magomedrasul Majidov  and Aghasi Mammadov  in boxing, Nizami Pashayev  in Olympic weightlifting, Azad Asgarov  in pankration, 
Eduard Mammadov  in kickboxing, and K-1  fighter Zabit Samedov. Azerbaijan has recently employed a number of top Iranian athletes
and coaches to its national teams by granting them Azerbaijani nationalities. These include Saman Tahmasebi, Sabah Shariati and
Jamshid Kheyrabadi in wrestling; and Reza Mehmandoost and Milad Beigi in Taekwando.[294]

Azerbaijan hosted several major sport competitions in last decade, including the 2013 F1 Powerboat World Championship, 2012 FIFA
U-17 Women's World Cup, 2011 AIBA World Boxing Championships, 2010 European Wrestling Championships, 2009 Rhythmic Gymnastics
European Championships, 2014 European Taekwondo Championships.[295]  On 8 December 2012, Baku  was selected to host the 2015
European Games, the first to be held in competition's history.[296]  Baku is also set to host the forth Islamic Solidarity Games 
in 2017. The most important annual sporting events held in the country are Baku Cup  and Tour d'Azerbaïdjan  cycling race.

SEE ALSO
 * Azerbaijan portal
 * Asia portal

 * Book: Azerbaijan

 * Outline of Azerbaijan
 * Index of Azerbaijan-related articles

REFERENCES
 1.   ^  "Azərbaycanda Əhalinin Sayı Açıqlandı" [Population of Azerbaijan Announced]  (in Azerbaijani). 15 December 2014.
 2.   ^ a  b  c  d  "Azerbaijan". International Monetary Fund.
 3.   ^  "Gini Index". World Bank. Retrieved 2 March  2011.
 4.   ^  "Human Development Index, 2012 Update". United Nations. 2011. Retrieved 15 June  2012.
 5.   ^  While often politically aligned with Europe, Azerbaijan is generally considered to be at least mostly in Southwest Asia
      geographically with its northern part bisected by the standard Asia-Europe divide, the Greater Caucasus. The United Nations 
      classification of world regions  places Azerbaijan in Western Asia; the CIA World Factbook  places it mostly in Southwest
      Asia [1]  and Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary  places it in both; NationalGeographic.com, and Encyclopædia
      Britannica  also place Georgia in Asia. Conversely, some sources place Azerbaijan in Europe such as Worldatlas.com.
 6.   ^ a  b  c  d  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (1995). Russia and Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition. Columbia University Press.
      pp. 69, 133. ISBN978-0-231-07068-3.
 7.   ^  Pipes, Richard  (1997). The Formation of the Soviet Union: Communism and Nationalism 1917–1923  (2nd ed.). Cambridge,
      Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp. 218–220, 229. ISBN978-0-674-30951-7.
 8.   ^  King, David C. (2006). Azerbaijan. Marshall Cavendish. p. 27. ISBN978-0761420118.
 9.   ^  Zürcher, Christoph (2007). The Post-Soviet Wars: Rebellion, Ethnic Conflict, and Nationhood in the Caucasus
      ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). New York: New York University Press. p. 168. ISBN978-0814797099.
 10.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 822 от 30 апреля 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Archived from the original  on 3 May 2011.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 11.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 853 от 29 июля 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 12.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 874 14 октября 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Archived from the original  on 3 May 2011.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 13.  ^  Резолюция СБ ООН № 884 от 12 ноября 1993 года  (in Russian). United Nations. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 14.  ^ a  b  c  d  "Azerbaijan: Membership of international groupings/organisations". British Foreign & Commonwealth Office. 
      Archived  from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 15.  ^  Europa Publications Limited (1998). Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States. Routledge. p. 154. ISBN
      978-1-85743-058-5.
 16.  ^ a  b  "Elections & Appointments – Human Rights Council". United Nations. Archived  from the original on 20 December 2008.
      Retrieved 3 January  2009.
 17.  ^  "The non-aligned engagement". The Jakarta Post. Retrieved 26 May  2011.
 18.  ^  Cornell, Svante E. (2010). Azerbaijan Since Independence. M.E. Sharpe. pp. 165, 284. Indicative of general regional
      trends and a natural reemergence of previously oppressed religious identity, an increasingly popular ideological basis for
      the pursuit of political objectives has been Islam.... The government, for its part, has shown an official commitment to
      Islam by building mosques and respecting Islamic values... Unofficial Islamic groups sought to use aspects of Islam to
      mobilize the population and establish the foundations for a future political struggle.... Unlike Turkey, Azerbaijan does not
      have the powerful ideological legacy of secularism... the conflict with Armenia has bred frustration that is increasingly
      being answered by a combined Islamic and nationalist sentiment, especially among younger people... All major political
      forces are committed to secularism and are based, if anything, on a nationalist agenda.
 19.  ^  "Human Development Index and its components"  (PDF). United Nations Development Programme.
 20.  ^  "Interactive Infographic of the World's Best Countries". Newsweek. 15 August 2010. Archived  from the original on 22 July
      2011. Retrieved 24 July  2011.
 21.  ^  "Literacy rate among schoolchildren in Azerbaijan is 100% – UN report". News.Az. 28 October 2011.
 22.  ^  "Employment statistics in Azerbaijan". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Retrieved 26 May 
      2007.
 23.  ^  "Azerbaijan and the 2013 presidential election"  (PDF). UK Parliament briefing papers. 25 October 2013.
 24.  ^  "2012 Corruption Perceptions Index – Results". Transparency International. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 25.  ^  "Introduction: Azerbaijan". CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 6 March  2014.
 26.  ^  "Human Rights Watch: Azerbaijan". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved 6 March  2014.
 27.  ^  Houtsma, M. Th.  (1993). First Encyclopaedia of Islam 1913–1936  (reprint ed.). BRILL. ISBN978-90-04-09796-4.
 28.  ^  Schippmann, Klaus (1989). Azerbaijan: Pre-Islamic History. Encyclopædia Iranica. pp. 221–224. ISBN978-0-933273-95-5.
 29.  ^  Minahan, James (1998). Miniature Empires: A Historical Dictionary of the Newly Independent States. Greenwood Publishing
      Group. p. 20. ISBN978-0-313-30610-5.
 30.  ^  Chamoux, François (2003). Hellenistic Civilization. John Wiley and Sons. p. 26. ISBN978-0-631-22241-5.
 31.  ^  Bosworth A.B., Baynham E.J. (2002). Alexander the Great in Fact and fiction. Oxford University Press. p. 92. ISBN
      978-0-19-925275-6.
 32.  ^ a  b  Nevertheless, "despite being one of the chief vassals of Sasanian Shahanshah, the Albanian king had only a semblance
      of authority, and the Sassanid marzban  (military governor) held most civil, religious, and military authority.
 33.  ^ a  b  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (1999). Historical Dictionary of Azerbaijan. Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press. ISBN
      978-0-8108-3550-4.
 34.  ^  Darmesteter, James  (2004). "Frawardin Yasht". Avesta Khorda Avesta: Book Of Common Prayer  (reprint ed.). Kessinger
      Publishing. p. 93. ISBN978-1-4191-0852-5.
 35.  ^ a  b  c  "Azerbaijan: Early History: Iranian and Greek Influences". U.S. Library of Congress. Retrieved 7 June  2006.
 36.  ^In dictionariesF. Steingass: * āẕar-bād-gān
       * āẕar-abād-gūn
       * āẕar, āẕur
       * ādar
       * bāygān
       * pāy
      
      Dehkhoda: * آذربایجان/Âzarbâyjân  Archived  20 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آذربایگان/Âzarbâygân  Archived  16 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آذربادگان/Âzarbâdegân[permanent dead link]
       * آذر/Âzar  Archived  24 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * آدر/Âdar  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * بایگان/Bâygân  Archived  27 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
       * بادگان/Bâdegân  Archived  10 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
       * -پای/pây-  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * گان-/-gân  Archived  10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
       * جان-/-jân  Archived  28 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine. (Persian)
      
      
 37.  ^  Touraj Atabaki. Iran and the First World War: Battleground of the Great Powers'  I.B.Tauris, 4 September 2006 ISBN
      978-1860649646  p 132
 38.  ^  Yilmaz, Harun (2015). National Identities in Soviet Historiography: The Rise of Nations Under Stalin. Routledge. p. 21. 
      ISBN978-1317596646. On May 27, the Democratic Republic of Azerbaijan (DRA) was declared with Ottoman military support. The
      rulers of the DRA refused to identify themselves as [Transcaucasian] Tatar, which they rightfully considered to be a Russian
      colonial definition. (...) Neighboring Iran did not welcome did not welcome the DRA's adoptation of the name of "Azerbaijan"
      for the country because it could also refer to Iranian Azerbaijan and implied a territorial claim.
 39.  ^  Barthold, Vasily (1963). Sochineniya, vol II/1. Moscow. p. 706. (...) whenever it is necessary to choose a name that will
      encompass all regions of the republic of Azerbaijan, name Arran  can be chosen. But the term Azerbaijan was chosen because
      when the Azerbaijan republic was created, it was assumed that this and the Persian Azerbaijan  will be one entity, because
      the population of both has a big similarity. On this basis, the word Azerbaijan was chosen. Of course right now when the
      word Azerbaijan is used, it has two meanings as Persian Azerbaijan and as a republic, its confusing and a question rises as
      to which Azerbaijan is talked about.  |access-date=  requires |url=  (help)
 40.  ^ a  b  Atabaki, Touraj (2000). Azerbaijan: Ethnicity and the Struggle for Power in Iran. I.B.Tauris. p. 25. ISBN
      9781860645549.
 41.  ^ a  b  c  Dekmejian, R. Hrair; Simonian, Hovann H. (2003). Troubled Waters: The Geopolitics of the Caspian Region. I.B.
      Tauris. p. 60. ISBN978-1860649226. Until 1918, when the Musavat regime decided to name the newly independent state
      Azerbaijan, this designation had been used exclusively to identify the Iranian province of Azerbaijan.
 42.  ^ a  b  c  Rezvani, Babak (2014). Ethno-territorial conflict and coexistence in the caucasus, Central Asia and Fereydan:
      academisch proefschrift. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. p. 356. ISBN978-9048519286. The region to the north of the
      river Araxes was not called Azerbaijan prior to 1918, unlike the region in northwestern Iran that has been called since so
      long ago.
 43.  ^  Fragner, B.G. (2001). Soviet Nationalism: An Ideological Legacy to the Independant Republics of Central Asia. I.B. Tauris
      and Company. pp. 13–32. In the post Islamic sense, Arran and Shirvan  are often distinguished, while in the pre-Islamic era,
      Arran or the western Caucasian Albania  roughly corresponds to the modern territory of the republic of Azerbaijan. In the 
      Soviet  era, in a breathtaking manipulation, historical Azerbaijan  (northwestern Iran) was reinterpreted as "South
      Azerbaijan" in order for the Soviets to lay territorial claim on historical Azerbaijan proper which is located in modern-day
      northwestern Iran.  |access-date=  requires |url=  (help)
 44.  ^  Azakov, Siyavush. "National report on institutional landscape and research policy Social Sciences and Humanities in
      Azerbaijan"  (PDF). Institute of Physics. Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 45.  ^  Chaumont, M. L. (1984). "Albania". Encyclopædia Iranica.
 46.  ^  Maps and accompanying commentary in Hewsen, Robert H. Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
      2001: map 19 (Orontid Armenia, p. 33), map 20 (Empire of Tigranes the Great, p. 34, map 21 (Artaxiad Armenia, p. 35), map 27
      (Arsakid Armenia, p. 45
 47.  ^  A. E. Redgate. The Armenians. Blackwell Publishers. Oxford. Maps 2.1, 7.2, 8.2
 48.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001, p. 102.
 49.  ^  Robert H. Hewsen. Ethno-history and the Armenian influence upon the Caucasian Albanians. Classical Armenian culture:
      Influence and creativity, Scholars press, Philadelphia, 1982, p.33.
 50.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (2001). "Armenia: a Historical Atlas". Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  Missing or empty |url=  (
      
      help)  map Caucasian Albania
 51.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (1982). Thomas J. Samuelian, ed. "Ethno-History and the Armenian Influence upon the Caucasian
      Albanians". Classical Armenian Culture: Influences and Creativity. (Philadelphia: Scholars Press. p. 45.  Missing or empty 
      |url=  (help)
 52.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. (2001). Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 32–33, map 19 (shows the
      territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh as part of the Orontids' Kingdom of Armenia).
 53.  ^  Моисей Хоренский. Армянская География VII в. Перевод Патканова К.П. СПб., 1877. стр. 40,17
 54.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. "The Kingdom of Artsakh," in T. Samuelian & M. Stone, eds. Medieval Armenian Culture. Chico, CA, 1983
 55.  ^  Yarshater, E. (1987). "The Iranian Language of Azerbaijan". Encyclopædia Iranica. III/2.
 56.  ^  Ludwig, Paul (1998). Proceedings of the Third European Conference of Iranian Studies. 1  (Nicholas Sims-Williams (ed.)
      ed.). Cambridge: Wiesbaden: Reichert. ISBN978-3-89500-070-6.
 57.  ^  Roy, Olivier (2007). The new Central Asia: geopolitics and the birth of nations  (reprint ed.). I.B. Tauris. p. 6. ISBN
      978-1-84511-552-4.
 58.  ^  R. Ward, Steven (2009). Immortal: a military history of Iran and its armed forces. Georgetown University Press. p. 43. 
      ISBN978-1-58901-258-5.
 59.  ^  Malcolm Wagstaff, John (1985). The evolution of middle eastern landscapes: an outline to A.D. 1840, Part 1840. Rowman &
      Littlefield. p. 205. ISBN978-0-389-20577-7.
 60.  ^  L. Altstadt, Audrey (1992). The Azerbaijani Turks: power and identity under Russian rule. Hoover Press. p. 5. ISBN
      978-0-8179-9182-1.
 61.  ^  Akiner, Shirin  (2004). The Caspian: politics, energy and security. RoutledgeCurzon. p. 158. ISBN978-0-7007-0501-6.
 62.  ^  Shirin Akiner (2004). The Caspian. Taylor & Francis. ISBN9780203641675. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 63.  ^  "In Safavi times, Azerbaijan was applied to all the muslim-ruled khanates of the eastern Caucasian as well, as to the
      area south of the Araz River as far as the Qezel Uzan River, the latter region being approximately the same as the modern
      Iranian ostans of East and West Azerbaijan."Atkin, Muriel (1980). Russia and Iran, 1780–1828. University of Minnesota Press.
      p. xi. ISBN978-0-8166-5697-4.
 64.  ^  Walker, Christopher J. (1980). Armenia, the survival of a nation. Croom Helm. p. 45. Tsitsianov next moved against the
      semi-independent Iranian khanates. On the thinnest of pretexts he captured the Muslim town of Gandja, the seat of Islamic
      learning in the Caucasus (...)
 65.  ^  Saparov, Arsène (2014). From Conflict to Autonomy in the Caucasus: The Soviet Union and the Making of Abkhazia, South
      Ossetia and Nagorno Karabakh. Routledge. ISBN978-1317637837. Even though these principalities [the khanates] had not been
      under Iranian suzerainty since the assasination of Nadir Shah  in 1747, they were traditionally considered an inalienable
      part of Iranian domains. (...) To the semi-independent Caucasian principalities the appearance of the new Great Power (...)
 66.  ^  Kashani-Sabet, Firoozeh (May 1997). "Fragile Frontiers: The Diminishing Domains of Qajar Iran". International Journal of
      Middle East Studies. 29  (2): 210. doi:10.1017/s0020743800064473. In 1795, Ibrahim Khalil Khan, the wali of Qarabagh, warned
      Sultan Selim III of Aqa Muhammad Khan's ambitions. Fearing for his independence, he informed the Sultan of Aqa Muhammad
      Khan's ability to subdue Azerbaijan and later Qarabagh, Erivan, and Georgia.
 67.  ^  Barker, Adele Marie; Grant, Bruce (2010). The Russia Reader: History, Culture, Politics. Duke University Press. p. 253. 
      ISBN978-0822346487. But they were relatively more accessible given the organization of small, centralized, semi-independent
      khanates that functioned through the decline of Iranian rule after the death of Nadir Shah in the mid-eighteenth century
      (...)
 68.  ^  Avery, Peter; Hambly, Gavin (1991). The Cambridge History of Iran. Cambridge University Press. p. 126. ISBN
      978-0-521-20095-0. Agha Muhammad Khan could now turn to the restoration of the outlying provinces of the Safavid kingdom.
      Returning to Tehran in the spring of 1795, he assembled a force of some 60,000 cavalry and infantry and in Shawwal
      Dhul-Qa'da/May, set off for Azarbaijan, intending to conquer the country between the rivers Aras and Kura, formerly under
      Safavid control. This region comprised a number of khanates of which the most important was Qarabagh, with its capital at
      Shusha; Ganja, with its capital of the same name; Shirvan across the Kura, with its capital at Shamakhi; and to the
      north-west, on both banks of the Kura, Christian Georgia (Gurjistan), with its capital at Tiflis.
 69.  ^  Encyclopedia of Soviet law By Ferdinand Joseph Maria Feldbrugge, Gerard Pieter van den Berg, William B. Simons, Page 457
 70.  ^  King, Charles  (2008). The ghost of freedom: a history of the Caucasus. University of Michigan. p. 10. ISBN
      978-0-19-517775-6.
 71.  ^  Ga ́bor A ́goston,Bruce Alan Masters. Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire  Infobase Publishing, 1 January 2009 ISBN
      1438110251  p 125
 72.  ^  Multiple Authors. "Caucasus and Iran". Encyclopædia Iranica. Retrieved 3 September  2012.
 73.  ^  Swietochowski, Tadeusz  (2004). Russian Azerbaijan, 1905–1920: The Shaping of a National Identity in a Muslim Community.
      Cambridge University Press. p. 5. ISBN978-0-521-52245-8.
 74.  ^ a  b  Timothy C. Dowling Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond  pp 728–729
      ABC-CLIO, 2 December 2014 ISBN 1598849484
 75.  ^  L. Batalden, Sandra (1997). The newly independent states of Eurasia: handbook of former Soviet republics. Greenwood
      Publishing Group. p. 98. ISBN978-0-89774-940-4.
 76.  ^  E. Ebel, Robert, Menon, Rajan (2000). Energy and conflict in Central Asia and the Caucasus. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 181.
       ISBN978-0-7425-0063-1.
 77.  ^  Andreeva, Elena (2010). Russia and Iran in the great game: travelogues and orientalism  (reprint ed.). Taylor & Francis.
      p. 6. ISBN978-0-415-78153-4.
 78.  ^  Çiçek, Kemal, Kuran, Ercüment (2000). The Great Ottoman-Turkish Civilisation. University of Michigan. ISBN
      978-975-6782-18-7.
 79.  ^  Ernest Meyer, Karl, Blair Brysac, Shareen (2006). Tournament of Shadows: The Great Game and the Race for Empire in
      Central Asia. Basic Books. p. 66. ISBN978-0-465-04576-1.
 80.  ^  Swietochowski, Tadeusz. Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia 2003  Taylor and Francis, 2003. ISBN 1857431375  p 104
 81.  ^  Russia and a Divided Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition, by Tadeusz Świętochowski, Columbia University Press, 1995,
      p. 66
 82.  ^  Smith, Michael (April 2001). "Anatomy of Rumor: Murder Scandal, the Musavat Party and Narrative of the Russian Revolution
      in Baku, 1917–1920". Journal of Contemporary History. 36  (2): 228. doi:10.1177/002200940103600202. The results of the March
      events were immediate and total for the Musavat. Several hundreds of its members were killed in the fighting; up to 12,000
      Muslim civilians perished; thousands of others fled Baku in a mass exodus
 83.  ^  Minahan, James B. Miniature Empires: A Historical Dictionary of the Newly Independent States. p. 22. ISBN0-313-30610-9. 
      The tensions and fighting between the Azerbaijanis and the Armenians in the federation culminated in the massacre of some
      12,000 Azerbaijanis in Baku by radical Armenians and Bolshevik troops in March 1918
 84.  ^  Michael Smith. "Pamiat' ob utratakh i Azerbaidzhanskoe obshchestvo/Traumatic Loss and Azerbaijani. National Memory". 
      Azerbaidzhan i Rossiia: obshchestva i gosudarstva (Azerbaijan and Russia: Societies and States)  (in Russian). Sakharov
      Center. Retrieved 21 August  2011.
 85.  ^ a  b  c  Kazemzadeh, Firuz (1951). The Struggle for Transcaucasia: 1917–1921. The New York Philosophical Library. pp. 124,
      222, 229, 269–270. ISBN978-0-8305-0076-5.
 86.  ^  Schulze, Reinhard. A Modern History of the Islamic World. I.B.Tauris, 2000. ISBN 978-1-86064-822-9.
 87.  ^  Горянин, Александр (28 August 2003). Очень черное золото  (in Russian). GlobalRus. Archived  from the original on 6
      September 2003. Retrieved 28 August  2003.
 88.  ^  Горянин, Александр. История города Баку. Часть 3.  (in Russian). Window2Baku.
 89.  ^  Pope, Hugh (2006). Sons of the conquerors: the rise of the Turkic world. New York: The Overlook Press. p. 116. ISBN
      978-1-58567-804-4.
 90.  ^  "Azerbaijan celebrates day of victory over fascism". "Contact.az". 9 May 2011. Retrieved 9 May  2011.
 91.  ^  "Victory over Nazis 'was impossible without Baku oil'". "AzerNEWS". 8 May 2010. Retrieved 8 May  2010.
 92.  ^  Michael P., Croissant (1998). The Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict: causes and implications. United States of America: Praeger
      Publishers. pp. 36, 37. ISBN0-275-96241-5.
 93.  ^  "Human Rights Watch. "Playing the "Communal Card": Communal Violence and Human Rights"". Human Rights Watch.
 94.  ^ a  b  "Milli Məclisin tarixi. Azərbaycan SSR Ali Soveti (1920–1991-ci illər)" [The history of Milli Majlis. Supreme
      Soviet
      of Azerbaijan SSR (1920–1991)]. Retrieved 1 December  2010.
 95.  ^  Full text of the Bishkek Protocol with signatures of representatives of Azerbaijan, Nagorno-Karabakh, and Armenia. 
      http://peacemaker.un.org/armeniaazerbaijan-bishkekprotocol94
 96.  ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  "Azerbaijan". World Factbook. CIA. 2009. Archived  from the original on 10 June 2009. Retrieved 4
      June  2009.
 97.  ^  Thomas De Waal. Black Garden: Armenia And Azerbaijan Through Peace and War. New York: New York University Press, p. 286. 
      ISBN 978-0-8147-1945-9.
 98.  ^  "Massacre by Armenians Being Reported". New York Times. 3 March 1992. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 99.  ^  Smolowe, Jill (16 March 1992). "Tragedy Massacre in Khojaly". Time. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 100. ^  A Conflict That Can Be Resolved in Time: Nagorno-Karabakh. International Herald Tribune.  29 November 2003.
 101. ^  "General Assembly adopts resolution reaffirming territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, demanding withdrawal of all
      Armenian
      forces". United Nations General Assembly. 14 March 2008. Retrieved 14 March  2008.
 102. ^  Southern Caucasus: Facing Integration Problems, Ethnic Russians Long For Better Life. EurasiaNet.org. 30 August 2003.
 103. ^  "Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic". The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1979).
 104. ^  "Azerbaijan: Rise to power". Encyclopedia of the Nations. 3 October 1993. Archived  from the original on 10 June 2011.
      Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 105. ^  "Timeline: Azerbaijan A chronology of key events:". BBC News. 31 March 2011.
 106. ^  "Azeri rights activist says 35 imprisoned special police unit members very sick". BBC Archive. 2 June 2000. Retrieved 15
      August  2009.
 107. ^  Efron, Sonni (18 March 1995). "Azerbaijan Coup Attempt Crushed Caucasus: Loyal forces storm a building and overcome
      mutinous police units, president reports.". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 15 August  2009.
 108. ^  Mulvey, Stephen (14 October 2003). "Aliyev and son keep it in the family". BBC News. Retrieved 14 October  2003.
 109. ^  "Azerbaijan's Geidar Aliev dies at 80". ChinaDaily. 16 December 2003. Archived  from the original on 17 December 2003.
      Retrieved 13 December  2003.
 110. ^  "Nov 2013 – Action against opposition". Keesing's Record of World Events. November 2013. p. 53026.
 111. ^ a  b  c  "Geographical data". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Archived  from the original
      on 25 May 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 112. ^ a  b  c  d  e  "Azerbaijan: Biodiversity". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 113. ^  "Azerbaijan's mud volcanoes on Seven Wonders of Nature shortlist". News.Az. Archived  from the original on 10 February
      2010. Retrieved 8 February  2010.
 114. ^  "Ecological problems in Azerbaijan". Enrin.grida.no. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 115. ^  "Orography of Azerbaijan". United Nations Environment Programme. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 116. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – Climate". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 117. ^ a  b  c  d  "Climate". Water Resources of the Azerbaijan Republic. Institute of Hydrometeorology, Ministry of Ecology and
      Natural Resources. Archived from the original  on 24 May 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 118. ^  "Azerbaijan: Geography". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute.
 119. ^  "The Karabakh Horse". Karabakh Foundation.
 120. ^  "Azerbaijan – Flora". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Retrieved 5 March  2010.
 121. ^  "Monitors criticize Azerbaijani elections". Al Jazeera. Archived  from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 8
      November  2010.
 122. ^  "Azerbaijan – Freedom House". FreedomHouse.org. Retrieved 4 August  2013.
 123. ^  "Combined Average Ratings: Independent Countries 2009". FreedomHouse.org. 2009. Retrieved 10 July  2012.
 124. ^  "Jailed without trial in Azerbaijan," The Washington Post. 1 March 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2015.
 125. ^  "No, this is the truth about Azerbaijan’s repression." The Washington Post. 25 September 2015. Retrieved 26 September
      2015.
 126. ^  DISGRACED AZERBAIJAN AND THE END OF ELECTION MONITORING AS WE KNOW IT
 127. ^  Jamie Doward. "Plush hotels and caviar diplomacy: how Azerbaijan's elite wooed MPs". the Guardian. Retrieved 4 July  2015
      .
 128. ^  "Europe's caviar diplomacy with Azerbaijan must end". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 129. ^  "Baku Smooths Over Its Rights Record with a Thick Layer of Caviar". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 130. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – Foreign Relations". Country Studies. Retrieved 31 May  2007.
 131. ^  "Bilateral relations". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived  from the original on 4 May 2007. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 132. ^  Lenk, Arthur (7 March 2007). "15th Anniversary of Israel-Azebraijan Diplomatic Relations"  (PDF). Ministry of Foreign
      Affairs of Israel. Retrieved 21 March  2008.
 133. ^  Kardas, Saban. "Turkey Develops Special Relationship with Azerbaijan". Eurasia Daily Monitor Volume. Retrieved 23
      December  2010.
 134. ^  Katik, Mevlut. "Azerbaijan and Turkey Coordinate Nagorno-Karabakh Negotiation Position". EurasiaNet. Retrieved 23
      December  2010.
 135. ^ a  b  c  d  "National Security Concept of the Republic of Azerbaijan"  (PDF). United Nations. 23 May 2007. Retrieved 23
      May  2007.
 136. ^  Selim Özertem, Hasan. "Independence of Kosovo and the Nagorno-Karabakh Issue". TurkishWeekly. Retrieved 24 April  2008.
 137. ^  Botelho, Greg; Tuysuz, Gul (3 April 2016). "18 Armenian, 12 Azerbaijani troops killed in fighting". CNN.
 138. ^  "The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Administrative and territorial units of Azerbaijan
      Republic". Azstat.org. Archived  from the original on 12 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 139. ^  Azerbaijan: Short History of Statehood, Embassy of Republic of Azerbaijan in Pakistan, 2005, Chapter 3.
 140. ^  Creation of National Army in 1918  (Russian).
 141. ^  Law of the Republic of Azerbaijan on Armed Forces, No. 210-XII, 9 October 1991 (Russian).
 142. ^  Azerbaijan's Army Day (26 June)  declared by Presidential Decree of 22 May 1998.
 143. ^  C. W. Blandy Azerbaijan: Is War Over Nagornyy Karabakh a Realistic Option? Advanced Research and Assessment Group.
      Caucasus Series 08/17. – Defense Academy of the United Kingdom, 2008, p.12
 144. ^  Выступление Президента Азербайджанской Республики, Верховного Главнокомандующего Гейдара Алиева на церемонии,
      посвященной
      5-й годовщине образования Национальной гвардии – Штаб Национальной гвардии Азербайджана  (in Russian). Heydar Aliyev
      Heritage Research Center. 25 December 1996.
 145. ^  Abbasov, Shahin. "Azerbaijan: Baku Can Leapfrog over Ukraine, Georgia for NATO Membership". EurasiaNet. Archived  from
      the original on 6 June 2009. Retrieved 3 June  2009.
 146. ^ a  b  Владимир Мухин (24 January 2011). "Карабахский детонатор на взводе – В Баку и Ереване все четче звучит воинственная
      риторика". Nezavisimaya Gazeta. Archived  from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 147. ^  "Russia's neighbors are preparing for war (CIS countries and Georgia has surprised the world of increasing military
      expenditures)". Gruzianews.ru. 22 February 2011. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 148. ^  "AFP: Azerbaijan warns Armenia with show of military might". Google.com. 26 June 2011. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 149. ^  Eastern approaches Ex-communist Europe (3 October 2013). "The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict: A festering sore". The Economist
      . Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 150. ^  "Baku says Armenian president still hypocrite before world community". News.Az. Retrieved 15 October  2013.
 151. ^  "Azerbaijan to start manufacturing arms, military hardware in 2008". BBC Monitoring Service. Retrieved 26 January  2008.
 152. ^  "Azerbaijan to produce tanks, aviation bombs and pilotless vehicles in 2009". panarmenian. Archived  from the original on
      9 January 2009. Retrieved 24 December  2008.
 153. ^  "Uzeir Jafarov: "Azerbaijan will be unable to produce competitive military technique in the next five years"". Today.Az.
      Retrieved 26 September  2008.
 154. ^  "President Ilham Aliyev attends the openings of several defense-related facilities". Today.Az. Retrieved 4 March  2011.
 155. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – General Information". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Archived  from the original on 5 May 2007. Retrieved 
      22 May  2007.
 156. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan's Q1 inflation rate 16.6%, National Bank Chief says". Today.Az. Retrieved 29 May  2007.
 157. ^  Mehdizade, Sevinj. "Azerbaijan's New Manats: Design and Transition to a New Currency". Azerbaijan International.
 158. ^  Ismayilov, Rovshan. "Azerbaijan's Manat Makeover: Good Times Ahead?". EurasiaNet. Retrieved 7 December  2010.
 159. ^  "Top 10 reformers from Doing Business 2009". World Bank Group. Doing Business. Archived  from the original on 12
      September 2008. Retrieved 28 September  2008.
 160. ^  "World Economic Forum – The Global Competitiveness Report 2010-2011"  (PDF). Archived  (PDF)  from the original on 6
      December 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 161. ^  Bibliothek der Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, http://library.fes.de/pdf-files/id-moe/09454.pdf
 162. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan – General Information". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Archived  from the original on 28 May 2007. Retrieved 
      22 May  2007.
 163. ^  "Azerbaijan: Economy". globalEDGE. Retrieved 29 May  2007.[dead link]
 164. ^  "SOCAR plans to completed full gasification of Azerbaijan only by 2021". Azerbaijan Business Center. Retrieved 6 June 
      2010.
 165. ^ a  b  "Natural resources". The State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Archived from the original  on
      10 June 2007. Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 166. ^  "Azerbaijan: Status of Database". Central Asia and Caucasus Institute. Archived from the original  on 20 March 2007.
      Retrieved 28 May  2007.
 167. ^  "Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor – Azerbaijan". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 168. ^  "Azerbaijan: Transportation". Encyclopedia of the Nations. Archived  from the original on 18 April 2007. Retrieved 24 May 
       2007.
 169. ^  "Industry"  (PDF). Statistical Yearbook of Azerbaijan 2004. Archived from the original  (PDF)  on 2 February 2007.
      Retrieved 26 May  2007.
 170. ^  "Rapid Tourism Assessment for the Azerbaijan Tourism Sector Development Program – Organization for Security and
      Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)". Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 171. ^  Azərbaycan Qarabağın turizm imkanlarını təbliğ edir  (Azerbaijani)
 172. ^  Ismayilov, Rovshan. "Azerbaijan: Baku Boom Has Yet to Hit Regions". EurasiaNet. Archived  from the original on 19 August
      2007. Retrieved 12 August  2007.
 173. ^  "Ministry of Culture and Tourism of Azerbaijan: Goals". Tourism.az. 6 February 2004. Archived  from the original on 28
      November 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 174. ^  Ziyadov, Taleh. "The New Silk Roads"  (PDF). Central Asia-Caucasus Institute Silk Road Studies Program.
 175. ^  Zeyno Baran  (2005). "The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline: Implications for Turkey"  (PDF). The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
      Pipeline: Oil Window to the West. The Central Asia-Caucasus Institute, Silk Road Studies Program: 103–118. Retrieved 30
      December  2007.
 176. ^  "SCP Commissioning Commences"  (Press release). BP. 1 June 2006. Archived from the original  on 11 October 2007.
      Retrieved 4 June  2008.
 177. ^  "List of Contracting Parties to the Convention on Road Traffic"  (PDF). UN Economic Commission for Europe. Archived from 
      the original  (PDF)  on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 23 January  2010.
 178. ^  "Azerbaijan aims for hi-tech state". Euronews. Retrieved 19 December  2010.
 179. ^  "Azerbaijan is in TOP 10 of countries showing dynamic growth in Internet and mobile communications penetration". 
      bakutel.az. Retrieved 15 April  2013.
 180. ^  CIA.gov, CIA World Factbook Telephones – main lines in use, Azerbaijan 1,397,000 main lines
 181. ^  CIA.gov, CIA World Factbook Internet users, Azerbaijan Internet users: 1,485,000.
 182. ^  "Azerbaijani scientist invents earthquake-resistant building". News.Az. Retrieved 18 March  2011.
 183. ^  "International Station for the Forecasting of Earthquakes Atropatena-AZ3, Baku, Azerbaijan". Global Network for the
      Forecasting of Earthquakes.
 184. ^  Азербайджанский ученый изобрел метод оповещения о землетрясении  (in Russian). BlackSea News. Retrieved 29 March  2011.
 185. ^  "Arianespace signs deal to launch Azerbaijani satellite". News.Az. Archived  from the original on 8 November 2010.
      Retrieved 5 November  2010.
 186. ^  "Azerbaijan signs deal with Arianespace to launch satellite". Space Travel. Archived  from the original on 6 November
      2010. Retrieved 5 November  2010.
 187. ^  "Orbital Contracted to Build Azerbaijan's First Satellite". SatelliteToday. 28 November 2010. Archived  from the original
      on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 1 April  2011.
 188. ^  "Baku developing satellite to kick off national space program". Hurriyet Daily News and Economic Review. 3 December 2009.
      Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 189. ^  "Meeting held to coordinate orbital slots for Azersat". News.Az. 16 November 2009. Archived from the original  on 11 May
      2011. Retrieved 18 March  2016.
 190. ^  "Азербайджан рассчитывает запустить спутник связи AzerSat"  (in Russian). ComNews. Retrieved 29 July  2009.
 191. ^  The State Statistical Committee of the Azerbaijan Republic, The ethnic composition of the population according to the
      2009 census.
 192. ^ a  b  "Population". Azerbaijan Gender Information Center. Archived  from the original on 10 May 2007. Retrieved 27 May 
      2007.
 193. ^  "Xaricdəki təşkilatlar"  (in Azerbaijani). State Committee on Work with Diaspora. Retrieved 25 May  2007.
 194. ^ a  b  c  d  e  "Ethnic minorities". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived  from the original on 17 April 2007. Retrieved 
      27 May  2007.
 195. ^  CIA – The World Factbook. CIA.gov  "Iran".
 196. ^  "Demoqrafik göstəricilər". Gender.az  (in Azerbaijani). Retrieved 15 April  2013.
 197. ^ a  b  Population by language, sex and urban/rural residence, UN Data. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
 198. ^  "Ethnologue report for Azerbaijan". Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Archived  from the original on 18 December 2008.
      Retrieved 3 January  2009.
 199. ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  h  "Endangered languages in Europe and North Asia". Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 200. ^  Clifton, John M., editor. 2002 (vol 1.), 2003 (vol. 2). Studies in languages of Azerbaijan. Baku, Azerbaijan and Saint
      Petersburg, Russia: Institute of International Relations, Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan and North Eurasian Group, SIL
      International.
 201. ^  "Berkley Center for Religion Peace and World Affairs". Georgetown University. July 2012. Retrieved 23 May  2015.
 202. ^  Sharifov, Azad. "Legend of the Bibi-Heybat Mosque". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 11 July  2010.
 203. ^  "Mapping The Global Muslim Population"  (PDF). Archived  (PDF)  from the original on 19 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May  2011.
 204. ^  Administrative Department of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan – Presidential Library – Religion
 205. ^  http://www.pewforum.org/2009/10/07/mapping-the-global-muslim-population/
 206. ^  GALLUP – What Alabamians and Iranians Have in Common  – data accessed on 19 August 2014
 207. ^  "Global Christianity". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 1 December 2014. Retrieved 4 July  2015.
 208. ^  "Catholic Church in Azerbaijan". Catholic-Hierarchy. Archived  from the original on 29 April 2007. Retrieved 27 May  2007
      .
 209. ^ a  b  Corley, Felix (9 March 2002). "Azerbaijan: 125 religious groups re-registered". Keston News Service. Retrieved 9
      April  2002.
 210. ^  "5,000 Azerbaijanis adopted Christianity"  (in Russian). Day.az. 7 July 2007. Retrieved 30 January  2012.
 211. ^  "Christian Missionaries Becoming Active in Azerbaijan"  (in Azerbaijani). Tehran Radio. 19 June 2011. Retrieved 12 August 
       2012.
 212. ^  Rothholz, Peter (20 November 2015). "Jewish Life in Azerbaijan Embodies Muslim-Majority Nation's Culture of Tolerance".
      BreakingIsraelNews. JNS.org.
 213. ^  "Baku gives land for Jewish cultural center, kosher restaurant". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 11 December 2013.
 214. ^  Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany. "How I Accidentally Became a Lobbyist for Azerbaijan". Foreign Policy.
 215. ^  Sloame, Joanna. "Azerbaijan". Jewish Virtual Library. American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise.
 216. ^  http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/192997.pdf
 217. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijan: A Country Study, Education, Health, and Welfare". Country Studies.
 218. ^  "Human Development Report 2009"  (PDF). United Nations Development Program 2009. Retrieved 2009.  Check date values in: 
      |access-date=  (help)
 219. ^  "Education in Azerbaijan, The Challenges of Transition". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 220. ^  Waters, Zena. "What exactly is Novruz Bayram". Azerbaijan Today. Retrieved 22 March  2009.
 221. ^  David C. King. Azerbaijan, Marshall Cavendish, 2006, p. 94
 222. ^ a  b  Энциклопедический музыкальный словарь, 2-е изд., Москва, 1966 (Encyclopedical Music Dictionary  (1966), 2nd ed.,
      Moscow)
 223. ^  "The Azerbaijan musical instruments". Atlas.musigi-dunya.az. Archived  from the original on 26 August 2007. Retrieved 27
      May  2007.
 224. ^  During, Jean (2001). "Azerbaijan". The Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. Macmillan. ISBN978-0-333-23111-1.
 225. ^  Duncan, Ishhad. "The Baku Jazz Festival: Reviving a Tradition in Azerbaijan". EurasiaNet. Archived  from the original on
      8 May 2005. Retrieved 27 April  2005.
 226. ^  "ashik,shaman"  – European University Institute, Florence, Italy  (retrieved 10 August 2006).
 227. ^  "Azerbaijan's ashug art included into UNESCO list of Intangible Cultural Heritage". Today.Az. Archived  from the original
      on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 1 October  2009.
 228. ^  Hutcheon, David (19 September 2008). "Alim Qasimov: the living legend you've never heard of". The Times. London.
      Retrieved 19 September  2008.
 229. ^  Augstein, Frank. "Azerbaijan duo upset favorites Ireland for first-time win at 2011 Eurovision Song Contest". Daily
      Journal. Associated Press. Retrieved 14 May  2011.
 230. ^  "Azerbaijan wins the Eurovision Song Contest". BBC News. 14 May 2011. Archived  from the original on 14 May 2011.
      Retrieved 14 May  2011.
 231. ^  Lusher, Adam (15 May 2011). "Azerbaijan wins Eurovision Song Contest". The Telegraph. London. Retrieved 15 May  2011.
 232. ^  Azerbaijan. Cultural life. Encyclopædia Britannica.
 233. ^ a  b  Beale, Thomas William; Keene Henry George (1894). An Oriental Biographical Dictionary. W.H.Allen. p. 311.
 234. ^ a  b  A.Caferoglu, "Adhari(azeri)",in Encyclopedia of Islam, (new edition), Vol. 1, (Leiden, 1986)
 235. ^  Tyrrell, Maliheh S. (2001). Aesopian Literary Dimensions of Azerbaijani Literature of the Soviet Period, 1920–1990.
      Lexington Books. p. 12. ISBN978-0-7391-0169-8.
 236. ^  Průšek, Jaroslav (1974). Dictionary of Oriental Literatures. Basic Books. p. 138.
 237. ^  Baldick, Julian (2000). Mystical Islam: An Introduction to Sufism. I.B. Tauris. p. 103. ISBN978-1-86064-631-7.
 238. ^ a  b  Burrill, Kathleen R.F. (1972). The Quatrains of Nesimi Fourteenth-Century Turkic Hurufi. Walter de Gruyter GmbH &
      Co. KG. ISBN978-90-279-2328-8.
 239. ^  Lambton, Ann K. S.; Holt, Peter Malcolm; Lewis, Bernard (1970). The Cambridge History of Islam. Cambridge University
      Press. p. 689. ISBN978-0-521-29138-5.
 240. ^ a  b  c  "Seyid Imadeddin Nesimi". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2008. Archived  from the original on 18 January 2008.
      Retrieved 1 September  2008.
 241. ^  Babinger, Franz (2008). "Nesīmī, Seyyid ʿImād al-Dīn". Encyclopaedia of Islam. Brill Online. Retrieved 1 September  2008.
 242. ^  Michael E. Meeker, "The Dede Korkut Ethic", International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 24, No. 3 (Aug. 1992),
      395–417. excerpt: The Book of Dede Korkut is an early record of oral Turkic folktales in Anatolia, and as such, one of the
      mythic charters of Turkish nationalist ideology. The oldest versions of the Book of Dede Korkut consist of two manuscripts
      copied in the 16th century. The twelve stories that are recorded in these manuscripts are believed to be derived from a
      cycle of stories and songs circulating among Turkic peoples living in northeastern Anatolia and northwestern Azerbaijan.
      According to Lewis (1974), an older substratum of these oral traditions dates to conflicts between the ancient Oghuz and
      their Turkish rivals in Central Asia (the Pecheneks and the Kipchaks), but this substratum has been clothed in references to
      the 14th-century campaigns of the Akkoyunlu Confederation of Turkic tribes against the Georgians, the Abkhaz, and the Greeks
      in Trebizond. Such stories and songs would have emerged no earlier than the beginning of the 13th century, and the written
      versions that have reached us would have been composed no later than the beginning of the 15th century. By this time, the
      Turkic peoples in question had been in touch with Islamic civilization for several centuries, had come to call themselves
      "Turcoman" rather than "Oghuz," had close associations with sedentary and urbanized societies, and were participating in
      Islamized regimes that included nomads, farmers, and townsmen. Some had abandoned their nomadic way of life altogether.
 243. ^  Cemal Kafadar(1995), "in Between Two Worlds: Construction of the Ottoman states", University of California Press, 1995.
      Excerpt: "It was not earlier than the fifteenth century. Based on the fact that the author is buttering up both the
      Akkoyunlu and Ottoman rulers, it has been suggested that the composition belongs to someone living in the undefined border
      region lands between the two states during the reign of Uzun Hassan (1466–78). G. Lewis on the hand dates the composition
      "fairly early in the 15th century at least."
 244. ^ a  b  İlker Evrım Bınbaş,Encyclopædia Iranica, "Oguz Khan Narratives" Encyclopædia Iranica | Articles. Retrieved October
      2010. "The Ketāb-e Dede Qorqut, which is a collection of twelve stories reflecting the oral traditions of the Turkmens in
      the 15th-century eastern Anatolia, is also called Oḡuz-nāma"
 245. ^  Minorsky, Vladimir (1942). "The Poetry of Shah Ismail". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies,
      University of London. 10  (4): 1053. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00090182.
 246. ^  Samuel, Geoffrey; Gregor, Hamish; Stutchbury, Elisabeth (1994). Tantra and Popular Religion in Tibet. International
      Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan. p. 60. ISBN978-81-85689-68-5.
 247. ^  "The traditional art of Azerbaijani carpet weaving in the Republic of Azerbaijan". Unesco.org. Archived  from the
      original on 5 December 2010. Retrieved 4 January  2011.
 248. ^  "Azerbaijani carpet entered UNESCO List of Intangible Cultural Heritage". Azerbaijan Press Agency. Retrieved 4 January 
      2011.
 249. ^  "Ancient Heritage of the BTC – SCP Pipeline Corridor". Smithsonian. Retrieved 21 April  2014.
 250. ^  "Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Educación, la Ciencia y la Cultura". UNESCO.
 251. ^  Akhmedov, IA. Азербайджанская кухня  (in Russian). Издательство "Ишыг".
 252. ^  "Chaihana: culture in action". Aze.info. Retrieved 14 December  2012.
 253. ^  The Azerbaijani Turks: power and identity under Russian rule. Audrey L. Altstadt. Hoover Institution Press. ISBN
      9780817991821. Retrieved 9 September  2013.
 254. ^  Khanlou, Pirouz. "Baku's Architecture A Fusion of East and West". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 255. ^  "Azerbaijan Properties inscribed on the World Heritage List". UNESCO.
 256. ^  "World Heritage Sites in Azerbaijan". World Heritage Site.
 257. ^  "Over 70 underground stations to be built in Baku". News.Az. Retrieved 18 February  2011.
 258. ^  1 February 2012 Jon Walton (1 February 2012). "$100 Billion Khazar Islands Taking Shape". Construction Digital. Retrieved
       25 March  2013.
 259. ^  Glass, Nick. "Flame Towers light up Baku's historic skyline". CNN. Retrieved 14 April  2013.
 260. ^  Наскальные рисунки Гямигая
 261. ^  "Ornaments Coming from Gobustan". Diva International.
 262. ^  "Gobustan Rock Art". www.worldheritagesite.org. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 263. ^  "Azerbaijani Artists". www.arthistoryarchive.com. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 264. ^  "Steps of Time & Art is not only ugly". universes-in-universe.org. Retrieved 11 October  2013.
 265. ^ a  b  "Cinema in Azerbaijan: Pre-Soviet Era". "Azerbaijan International". Autumn 1997. Retrieved 12 March  2016.
 266. ^  Celebrating 100 Years in Film, not 80  by Aydin Kazimzade. Azerbaijan International, Autumn 1997
 267. ^ a  b  "Azerbaijani cinema in 1920–1935: Silent films". OCAZ.eu.
 268. ^  Kazimova, Arifa: "Media in Azerbaijan: The Ruling Family Dominates TV, the Opposition Has Some Papers" in the Caucasus
      Analytical Digest No. 25
 269. ^ a  b  Freedom House, Azerbaijan  2015 Press Freedom report
 270. ^  Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, The Protection of media freedom in Europe.Background report prepared by
      Mr William Horsley, special representative for media freedom of the Association of European Journalists
 271. ^  "Freedom of the Press 2013"  (PDF). Freedom House.
 272. ^  "Threat to retransmission of BBC, Voice of America and Radio Liberty/Radio Free Europe". Reporters Without Borders.
 273. ^  Ognianova, Nina. "Baku 2015: Press freedom, Azerbaijan, and the European Games". Committee to Protect Journalists.
 274. ^  Nozadze, Natalia. "Azerbaijan closes its doors". News. Amnesty International. Retrieved 15 June  2016.
 275. ^  Amnesty, International. "Annual report on Azerbaijan". Amnesty International.
 276. ^  "Sport". Expatwoman.com. Retrieved 12 April  2014.
 277. ^  "Azərbaycanda nə qədər futbolçu var?". news.milli.az  (in Azerbaijani). Retrieved 27 January  2014.
 278. ^  "Football in Azerbaijan". www.fifa.com. FIFA. Retrieved 27 January  2014.
 279. ^  "Нефтчи" стал первым азербайджанским футбольным клубом, вышедшим в групповой этап еврокубков – ФОТО. 1news.az  (in
      Russian). Retrieved 30 August  2012.
 280. ^  ЦСКА вылетел из еврокубков  (in Russian). UEFA. Retrieved 30 August  2012.
 281. ^  "Araz clinch third place on penalties". UEFA. 25 April 2010. Retrieved 25 April  2010.[dead link]
 282. ^  "Azerbaijan: Official Atlético sponsor". Club Atlético de Madrid. Retrieved 25 April  2015.
 283. ^  "Chess with Luke McShane". Express.co.uk. Retrieved 12 April  2014.
 284. ^  "Azerbaijan's chess team became European champion". Today.Az. 31 October 2009. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 285. ^  "Azerbaijan, Russia take gold at the European Team Chess Championship". Chessdom. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 286. ^  "World Chess Champion: Zeynab Mammadyarova". Azerbaijan International. Retrieved 30 June  2010.
 287. ^  "Carlsen beats Nakamura for perfect 2/2 start in the Gashimov Memorial". www.theweekinchess.com. Retrieved 24 April  2014
      .
 288. ^  История нард  (in Russian). 1-Kalyan. Retrieved 27 May  2007.
 289. ^  Нарды – игра, требующая сноровки и удачи  (Russian)
 290. ^  История Нард  (in Russian). Nards.
 291. ^  "More than just Mammadova: Azerbaijan's ladies cause World Championship upset". www.fivb.org  (Press release). Retrieved 
      8 May  2014.
 292. ^  "Vakıfbank women achieve historic success, winning intercontinental volleyball trophy". www.hurriyetdailynews.com.
      Retrieved 8 May  2014.
 293. ^  Sylt, Christian. "F1 Will Race in Azerbaijan in 2016 Says Ecclestone". www.forbes.com. Retrieved 25 July  2014.
 294. ^  http://namnak.com/%D8%A7%DB%8C%D8%B1%D8%A7%D9%86%DB%8C-%D9%87%D8%A7%DB%8C-%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D9%BE%DB%8C%DA%A9.p34800
 295. ^  "Azerbaijan is a country known for its love of sport and sportsmanship.". www.baku2015.com. Retrieved 27 January  2014.[
      permanent dead link]
 296. ^  "Baku 2015 heralds new era in European sports movement". The Washington Times. Retrieved 27 January  2014.

FURTHER READING
 * Olukbasi, Suha. Azerbaijan: A Political History. I.B. Tauris (2011). Focus on post-Soviet era.
 * de Waal, Thomas. Black Garden. NYU (2003). ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
 * Goltz, Thomas. Azerbaijan Diary : A Rogue Reporter's Adventures in an Oil-Rich, War-Torn, Post-Soviet Republic. M E Sharpe
   (1998). ISBN 0-7656-0244-X

EXTERNAL LINKS
Listen to this article  (info/dl)


This audio file was created from a revision of the "Azerbaijan" article dated 2008-06-23, and does not reflect subsequent edits to
the article. (Audio help)More spoken articlesThe Wikibook Wikijunior:Countries A-Z  has a page on the topic of: AzerbaijanFind
more aboutAzerbaijanat Wikipedia's sister projects * Definitions  from Wiktionary
 * Media  from Commons
 * News  from Wikinews
 * Quotations  from Wikiquote
 * Texts  from Wikisource
 * Textbooks  from Wikibooks
 * Travel guide  from Wikivoyage
 * Learning resources  from Wikiversity

General information * Azerbaijan International
 * Heydar Aliyev Foundation
 * Azerbaijan  at DMOZ
 * "Azerbaijan". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
 * Azerbaijan  at University of Colorado at Boulder
 * Country profile  from BBC
 * Key Development Forecasts for Azerbaijan  from International Futures
 *   Geographic data related to Azerbaijan  at OpenStreetMap
 *   Media related to Azerbaijan  at Wikimedia Commons

Major government resources * President of Azerbaijan website
 * Azerbaijan State Statistical Committee
 * United Nations Office in Azerbaijan

Major news media * Network NEWS Azerbaijan
 * Azerbaijan Today
 * Azerbaijan Press Agency
 * Trend News Agency
 * News.Az

Tourism * Azerbaijan Tourism Portal
 *   Wikimedia Atlas of Azerbaijan

Coordinates: 40°18′N 47°42′E﻿ /40.3°N 47.7°E﻿ / 40.3; 47.7

 * v
 * t
 * e

AzerbaijanarticlesHistoryEarly * Kura–Araxes culture
 * Khojaly–Gadabay culture
 * Shulaveri-Shomu culture
 * Mughan culture
 * Jar-Burial Culture
 * Leyla-Tepe culture
 * Mannaeans
 * Medes
 * Achaemenid Empire
 * Atropatene
 * Caucasian Albania
 * Parthian Empire
 * Arran (Caucasus)
 * Sasanian Empire
 * Shirvan

Middle Ages * Sajid dynasty
 * Sallarid dynasty
 * Rawwadids
 * Shaddadids
 * Shirvanshahs
 * Kingdom of Syunik  (Siunia dynasty)
 * Eldiguzids
 * Ilkhanate
 * Principality of Khachen  (House of Dop, House of Hasan-Jalalyan)
 * Kara Koyunlu
 * Ag Qoyunlu
 * Safavid dynasty
 * Afsharid dynasty
 * Zand dynasty
 * Qajar dynasty
 * Russo-Persian War (1804–13)
 * Treaty of Gulistan
 * Russo-Persian War (1826–28)
 * Treaty of Turkmenchay

Modern * Armenian–Tatar massacres
 * March Days
 * Armenian–Azerbaijani War
 * Azerbaijan Democratic Republic
 * Soviet Azerbaijan
 * Nagorno-Karabakh War
 * Black January
 * Independent Azerbaijan

By topic * History of the name Azerbaijan
 * The Land of Fire

Geography * Bodies of water
 * Caspian Sea
 * Climate
 * Earthquakes
 * Environment * issues
   
   
 * Extreme points
 * Fauna
 * Flora
 * Geology
 * Mountains
 * National parks
 * Orography
 * Protected areas
 * State reserves
 * Wildlife
 * more...

Subdivisions * Administrative divisions
 * Borders
 * Cities
 * World Heritage Sites
 * more...

PoliticsGovernment * Cabinet
 * Constitution
 * Elections
 * Foreign relations * European Union
   
   
 * Human rights * LGBT
   
   
 * Law enforcement
 * Ministry of National Security
 * National Assembly
 * Political parties
 * Politics
 * President
 * Prime Minister

Military * History
 * Air and Air Defence Force
 * Caspian Guard
 * Internal Troops
 * Land Forces
 * National Guard
 * Navy
 * Peacekeeping forces
 * State Border Service
 * Gabala Radar Station
 * Ministry of Defense
 * Ministry of Defence Industry
 * more...

Economy * Agriculture
 * Central Bank
 * Companies
 * Energy
 * Manat (currency)
 * Mineral industry
 * Petroleum industry
 * Telecommunications
 * Tourism
 * Transport
 * more...

Culture * Architecture
 * Art
 * Cinema
 * Cuisine
 * Dances
 * Dress
 * Folklore
 * Language
 * Literature
 * Media
 * Music * Ashiq
    * Meykhana
    * Mugham
   
   
 * Novruz (New Year)
 * Public holidays
 * Rugs
 * Sport
 * Theatre
 * more...

Demographics * Education
 * Ethnic minorities
 * Health
 * Languages
 * LGBT history
 * People * list
   
   
 * more...

Religion * Freedom of religion
 * Bahá'í
 * Christianity
 * Hinduism
 * Islam
 * Judaism
 * Zoroastrianism
 * more...

Symbols * Flag
 * National anthem
 * National emblem

 * Outline
 * Index

 * Book
 * Category
 * Portal

 * v
 * t
 * e

Countries and dependencies  of AsiaSovereign states * Afghanistan
 * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Bahrain
 * Bangladesh
 * Bhutan
 * Brunei
 * Cambodia
 * China
 * Cyprus
 * Egypt
 * Georgia
 * India
 * Indonesia
 * Iran
 * Iraq
 * Israel
 * Japan
 * Jordan
 * Kazakhstan
 * North Korea
 * South Korea
 * Kuwait
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Laos
 * Lebanon
 * Malaysia
 * Maldives
 * Mongolia
 * Myanmar
 * Nepal
 * Oman
 * Pakistan
 * Philippines
 * Qatar
 * Russia
 * Saudi Arabia
 * Singapore
 * Sri Lanka
 * Syria
 * Tajikistan
 * Thailand
 * East Timor (Timor-Leste)
 * Turkey
 * Turkmenistan
 * United Arab Emirates
 * Uzbekistan
 * Vietnam
 * Yemen

States with limited recognition * Abkhazia
 * Nagorno-Karabakh
 * Northern Cyprus
 * Palestine
 * South Ossetia
 * Taiwan

Dependencies  and  special
administrative regionsAustralia * Christmas Island
 * Cocos (Keeling) Islands

China * Hong Kong
 * Macau

United Kingdom * Akrotiri and Dhekelia
 * British Indian Ocean Territory

 * v
 * t
 * e

Sovereign states and dependencies  of EuropeSovereign states * Albania
 * Andorra
 * Armenia1
 * Austria
 * Azerbaijan1
 * Belarus
 * Belgium
 * Bosnia and Herzegovina
 * Bulgaria
 * Croatia
 * Cyprus1
 * Czech Republic
 * Denmark
 * Estonia
 * Finland
 * France
 * Georgia1
 * Germany
 * Greece1
 * Hungary
 * Iceland
 * Ireland
 * Italy
 * Kazakhstan1
 * Latvia
 * Liechtenstein
 * Lithuania
 * Luxembourg
 * Macedonia
 * Malta
 * Moldova
 * Monaco
 * Montenegro
 * Netherlands
 * Norway
 * Poland
 * Portugal
 * Romania
 * Russia1
 * San Marino
 * Serbia
 * Slovakia
 * Slovenia
 * Spain2
 * Sweden
 * Switzerland
 * Turkey1
 * Ukraine
 * United Kingdom
 * Vatican City

States with limited
recognition * Abkhazia1
 * Kosovo
 * Nagorno-Karabakh1
 * Northern Cyprus1
 * South Ossetia1
 * Transnistria

Dependencies  and
other territoriesDenmark * Faroe Islands * constituent country
   
   

Finland * Åland Islands * autonomous region
   
   

Norway * Jan Mayen
 * Svalbard * unincorporated areas
   
   

United Kingdom * Akrotiri and Dhekelia1 * sovereign base areas
   
   
 * Gibraltar * overseas territory
   
   
 * Guernsey
 * Isle of Man
 * Jersey * crown dependencies
   
   

1  Partially  in Asia, or entirely in Asia with cultural links to Europe. 2  Partially  in Africa * v
 * t
 * e

Commonwealth of Independent States  (CIS) * Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia
 * Eurasian Economic Union
 * Union State

MembershipMembers * Armenia
 * Azerbaijan
 * Belarus
 * Kazakhstan
 * Kyrgyzstan
 * Moldova
 * Russia
 * Tajikistan
 * Uzbekistan

Associate members * Turkmenistan
 * Ukraine

Former members * Georgia  (1993–2009)

History * Russian Empire
 * Soviet Union
 * Union of Sovereign States
 * Belavezha Accords  (Near abroad)
 * Alma-Ata Protocol

Sports * Unified Team at the Olympics
 * Unified Team at the Paralympics
 * CIS national bandy team
 * CIS national football team
 * CIS national ice hockey team
 * CIS national rugby team
 * CIS Cup (football)

Military * Collective Security Treaty Organization
 * Collective Rapid Reaction Force
 * Joint CIS Air Defense System

Economics * Economic Court
 * CISFTA
 * Eurasian Economic Community
 * Eurasian Patent Convention
 * Eurasian Patent Organization
 * EU Technical Aid

Organization * Interstate Aviation Committee

 *   Category

Authority control * WorldCat Identities
 * VIAF: 260253802
 * LCCN: n92000010
 * GND: 4068887-2
 * NDL: 00577523