For the de facto independent state, see Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.Nagorno-Karabakh
(Upper Karabakh),
Artsakh (Արցախ) * 
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
   Լեռնային Ղարաբաղ(Armenian)
   Leṙnayin Ġarabaġ
 * 
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
   Dağlıq Qarabağ / Yuxarı Qarabağ(Azerbaijani)
 * 
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   
   Нагорный Карабах(Russian)
   Nagorniy Karabakh

Location and extent of the former Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast  (lighter color).ReligionChristianity (Armenian Apostolic
Church)Area •Total4,400 km2
1,700 sq mi •Water (%)negligiblePopulation •2013 estimate146,573[1] •2010 census141,400[2] •Density29/km2
43/sq miTime zone(UTC+4) •Summer (DST)+5 (UTC)Drives on therightNagorno-Karabakh  is a landlocked  region in the South Caucasus, lying between Lower Karabakh  and Zangezur  and covering the
southeastern range of the Lesser Caucasus  mountains. The region is mostly mountainous and forested.

Nagorno-Karabakh is a disputed territory, internationally recognized as part of Azerbaijan,[3]  but most of the region is governed
by the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, a de facto  independent state with Armenian ethnic majority established on the basis of the 
Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast  of the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic. Azerbaijan has not exercised political authority
over the region since the advent of the Karabakh movement  in 1988. Since the end of the Nagorno-Karabakh War  in 1994,
representatives of the governments of Armenia  and Azerbaijan have been holding peace talks mediated by the OSCE Minsk Group  on
the region's disputed status.

The region is usually equated with the administrative borders of the former Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast  comprising an area
of 4,400 square kilometres (1,700 sq mi). The historical area of the region, however, encompasses approximately 8,223 square
kilometres (3,175 sq mi).[4][5]



NAME
The snow-covered Lesser Caucasus seen south of the Greater Caucasus. About 1800 the Karabagh Khanate was based in the southeast
corner of the Lesser Caucasus. It extended east into the lowlands, hence the name Nagorno-  or "Highland-" Karabagh for the
western part.The prefix Nagorno-  derives from the Russian attributive adjective  nagorny  (нагорный), which means "highland". The Azerbaijani 
names of the region include the similar adjectives "dağlıq" (mountainous) or "yuxarı" (upper). Such words are not used in the 
Armenian  name, but they have appeared in the official name of the region during the Soviet  era as Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous
Oblast. Other languages apply their own wording for mountainous, upper, or highland; for example, the official name used by the 
Nagorno-Karabakh Republic  in French is Haut-Karabakh, meaning "Upper Karabakh".[citation needed]

The name Karabakh  comprises two words, "kara" (meaning "black" in Turkic) and "bagh" (or "bakh", meaning "garden" in Persian).
Thus Karabakh  literally means "black garden".[6][7]  The name first appears in Georgian  and Persian sources of the 13th and 14th
centuries.[7]  Karabagh, an acceptable alternate spelling of Karabakh, denotes a kind of patterned rug  originally produced in the
area.[8]

According to an alternative theory proposed by Bagrat Ulubabyan, the name Karabakh  has a Turkic–Armenian origin, meaning "Greater
Baghk" (Armenian: Մեծ Բաղք), a reference to Ktish-Baghk (later: Dizak), one of the principalities of Artsakh under the rule of the
 Aranshahik  dynasty, which held the throne of the Kingdom of Syunik in the 11th–13th centuries and called itself the "Kingdom of
Baghk".[9]

The names for the region in the various local languages all translate to "mountainous Karabakh", or "mountainous black garden":

 * Armenian: Լեռնային Ղարաբաղ, transliterated  Leṙnayin Ġarabaġ  (IPA: /lɛrnɑˈjin ʁɑɾɑˈbɑʁ/)
 * Azerbaijani: Dağlıq Qarabağ, Дағлыг Гарабағ  (mountainous Karabakh; IPA: /dɑɣˈlɯɣ ɡɑˈɾɑbɑɣ/) or Yuxarı Qarabağ, Јухары Гарабағ 
   (upper Karabakh; IPA: /juxɑˈɾɯ ɡɑˈɾɑbɑɣ/)
 * Russian: Нагорный Карабах, transliterated  Nagornyy Karabakh  or Nagornyi Karabah  (IPA: /nɐˈɡornɨj kərɐˈbax/)

The Armenians  living in the area often refer to Nagorno-Karabakh as Artsakh  (Armenian: Արցախ), using the name of the 10th
province of the ancient Kingdom of Armenia. Urartian  inscriptions (9th–7th centuries BC) use the name Urtekhini  for the region.
[10]  Ancient Greek  sources called the area Orkhistene.[11]

HISTORY
ANTIQUITY AND EARLY MIDDLE AGES
Main article: History of Nagorno-Karabakh
The Amaras Monastery, founded in the 4th century by St. Gregory the Illuminator. In the 5th century, Mesrop Mashtots, inventor of
the Armenian alphabet, established at Amaras the first school to use his script.[12][13]The monastery at Gandzasar  was
commissioned by the House of Khachen  and completed in 1238Nagorno-Karabakh falls within the lands occupied by peoples known to
modern archaeologists as the Kura-Araxes culture, who lived between the two rivers Kura  and Araxes.

The ancient population of the region consisted of various autochthonous  local and migrant tribes who were mostly
non-Indo-Europeans.[14]  According to the prevailing western theory, these natives intermarried with Armenians who came to the
region after its inclusion into Armenia in the 2nd or, possibly earlier, in 4th century BC.[15]  Other scholars suggest that the
Armenians settled in the region as early as in the 7th century BC.[16]

In around 180 BC, Artsakh became one of the 15 provinces of the Armenian Kingdom  and remained so until the 4th century.[17] 
While formally having the status of a province (nahang), Artsakh possibly formed a principality  on its own — like Armenia's
province of Syunik. Other theories suggest that Artsakh was a royal land, belonging to the King of Armenia directly.[18]  Tigran
the Great, King of Armenia, (ruled from 95–55 BC), founded in Artsakh one of four cities named "Tigranakert" after himself.[19] 
The ruins of the ancient Tigranakert, located 30 miles (48 km) north-east of Stepanakert, are being studied by a group of
international scholars.

In 387 AD, after the partition of Armenia between Byzantium  and Sassanid Persia, two Armenian provinces Artsakh and Utik  became
part of the Sassanid satrapy of Caucasian Albania, which, in turn, came under strong Armenian religious and cultural influence.
[20][21]  At the time the population of Artsakh and Utik consisted of Armenians and several Armenized tribes.[14]

Armenian culture and civilization flourished in the early medieval Nagorno-Karabakh. In the 5th century, the first-ever Armenian
school was opened on the territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh—at the Amaras Monastery—by the efforts of St. Mesrop Mashtots, the
inventor of the Armenian alphabet.[22]  St. Mesrop was very active in preaching Gospel in Artsakh and Utik. Overall, Mesrop
Mashtots made three trips to Artsakh and Utik, ultimately reaching pagan territories at the foothills of the Greater Caucasus.[23] 
 The 7th-century Armenian linguist and grammarian Stephanos Syunetsi stated in his work that Armenians of Artsakh had their own
dialect, and encouraged his readers to learn it.[24]  In the same 7th century, Armenian[25]  poet Davtak Kertogh  writes his Elegy
on the Death of Grand Prince Juansher, where each passage begins with a letter of Armenian script in alphabetical order.[26][27] 
The only comprehensive history of Caucasian Albania was written in Armenian, by the historian Movses Kaghankatvatsi.[27]

HIGH MIDDLE AGES
Main article: Principality of KhachenAround the mid 7th century, the region was conquered by the invading Muslim Arabs through the
 Muslim conquest of Persia. Subsequently, it was ruled by local governors endorsed by the Caliphate. In 821 the Armenian[28] 
prince Sahl Smbatian  revolted in Artsakh and established the House of Khachen, which ruled Artsakh as a principality  until the
early 19th century.[29]  The name "Khachen" originated from Armenian word "khach," which means "cross".[30]  By 1000 the House of
Khachen proclaimed the Kingdom of Artsakh  with John Senecherib  as its first ruler.[31]  Initially Dizak, in southern Artsakh,
formed also a kingdom ruled by the ancient House of Aranshahik, descended of the earliest Kings of Caucasian Albania. In 1261,
after the daughter of the last king of Dizak married the king of Artsakh, Armenian[32]  prince Hasan Jalal Dola, the two states
merged into one[29]  Armenian[33]  Principality of Khachen. Subsequently, Artsakh continued to exist as a de facto independent
principality.

LATE MIDDLE AGES
Main article: Melikdoms of Karabakh
The Askeran Fortress, built by the Karabakh Khanate  ruler Panah Ali Khan  in the 18th century
The semi-independent Five Principalities  (Armenian: Խամսայի Մելիքություններ) of Karabakh (Gyulistan, Jraberd, Khachen, Varanda,
and Dizak), widely considered to be the last relic of Armenian statehood (15th-19th century).[34][35].

In the 15th century, the territory of Karabakh was part of the states ruled subsequently by the Kara Koyunlu  and Ak Koyunlu  
Turkic  tribal confederations. The Turkoman  lord Jahan Shah  (1437–67) assigned the governorship of upper Karabakh to local
Armenian princes, allowing a native Armenian leadership to emerge consisting of five noble families led by princes who held the
titles of meliks.[29]  These dynasties represented the branches of the earlier House of Khachen and were the descendants of the
medieval kings of Artsakh. Their lands were often referred to as the Country of Khamsa  (five  in Arabic). The Russian Empire 
recognized the sovereign  status of the five princes in their domains by a charter of the Emperor Paul I  dated 2 June 1799.[36]

The Armenian meliks were granted supreme command over neighboring Armenian principalities and Muslim khans in the Caucasus by the
Iranian king Nader Shah, in return for the meliks' victories over the invading Ottoman  Turks  in the 1720s.[37]  These five
principalities [38][39]  in Karabakh were ruled by Armenian families who had received the title Melik (prince) and were the
following:

 * Principality of Gulistan  - under the leadership of the Melik-Beglarian family
 * Principality of Jraberd  - under the leadership of the Melik-Israelian family
 * Principality of Khachen  - under the leadership of the Hasan-Jalalian  family
 * Principality of Varanda  - under the leadership of the Melik-Shahnazarian family
 * Principality of Dizak  - under the leadership of the Melik-Avanian family

The Armenian meliks maintained full control over the region until the mid-18th century.[40][citation needed]  In the early 18th
century, Iran's Nader Shah  took Karabakh out of control of the Ganja khans in punishment for their support of the Safavids, and
placed it under his own control[41][42]  In the mid-18th century, as internal conflicts between the meliks led to their weakening,

[40]  the Karabakh Khanate was formed.

MODERN ERA
Palace of the former ruler (khan) of Shusha. Taken from a postcard from the late 19th–early 20th century.
Aftermath of the Shusha massacre: Armenian half of Shusha destroyed by Azerbaijani armed forces in 1920, with the defiled 
Armenian
Cathedral of the Holy Savior  in the background.Karabakh became a protectorate  of the Imperial Russia  by the Kurekchay Treaty, signed between Ibrahim Khalil Khan  of Karabakh
and general Pavel Tsitsianov  on behalf of Tsar Alexander I  in 1805, according to which the Russian monarch recognized Ibrahim
Khalil Khan and his descendants as the sole hereditary rulers of the region.[43][44][45]  However, its new status was only
confirmed following the outcome of the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813), when through the loss in the war, Persia formally ceded
Karabakh to the Russian Empire per the Treaty of Gulistan  (1813),[46][47][48][49]  before the rest of Transcaucasia  was
incorporated into the Empire in 1828 by the Treaty of Turkmenchay, which came as an outcome of the Russo-Persian War (1826-1828).

In 1822, 9 years after passing from Iranian to Russian control, the Karabakh Khanate was dissolved, and the area became part of
the Elisabethpol Governorate  within the Russian Empire. After the transfer of the Karabakh Khanate to Russia, many Muslim
families immigrated to Persia, while many Armenians were induced by the Russian government to emigrate from Persia to Karabakh.
[50]

SOVIET ERA
Main article: Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast
Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast in the Soviet era.
Ethnic make-up of Nagorno-Karabakh in the late Soviet era.The present-day conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh has its roots in the
decisions made by Joseph Stalin  and the Caucasian Bureau (Kavburo) during the Sovietization  of Transcaucasia. Stalin was the
acting Commissar of Nationalities  for the Soviet Union during the early 1920s, the branch of the government under which the
Kavburo was created. After the Russian Revolution of 1917, Karabakh became part of the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative
Republic, but this soon dissolved into separate Armenian, Azerbaijani, and Georgian  states. Over the next two years (1918–1920),
there were a series of short wars  between Armenia and Azerbaijan over several regions, including Karabakh. In July 1918, the
First Armenian Assembly of Nagorno-Karabakh declared the region self-governing and created a National Council and government.[51] 
Later, Ottoman troops entered Karabakh, meeting armed resistance by Armenians.

After the defeat of the Ottoman Empire  in World War I, British troops occupied Karabakh.[40]  The British command provisionally
affirmed Khosrov bey Sultanov  (appointed by the Azerbaijani government) as the governor-general of Karabakh and Zangezur, pending
final decision by the Paris Peace Conference.[52]  The decision was opposed by Karabakh Armenians. In February 1920, the Karabakh
National Council preliminarily agreed to Azerbaijani jurisdiction, while Armenians elsewhere in Karabakh continued guerrilla
fighting, never accepting the agreement.[40][51]  The agreement itself was soon annulled by the Ninth Karabagh Assembly, which
declared union with Armenia in April.[40][51][53]

In April 1920, while the Azerbaijani army was locked in Karabakh fighting local Armenian forces, Azerbaijan was taken over by 
Bolsheviks.[40]  On 10 August 1920, Armenia signed a preliminary agreement with the Bolsheviks, agreeing to a temporary Bolshevik
occupation of these areas until final settlement would be reached.[54]  In 1921, Armenia and Georgia were also taken over by the 
Bolsheviks  who, in order to attract public support, promised they would allot Karabakh to Armenia, along with Nakhchivan  and
Zangezur (the strip of land separating Nakhchivan from Karabakh). However, the Soviet Union also had far-reaching plans concerning
 Turkey, hoping that it would, with a little help from them, develop along Communist  lines. Needing to placate Turkey, the Soviet
Union agreed to a division under which Zangezur would fall under the control of Armenia, while Karabakh and Nakhchivan would be
under the control of Azerbaijan. Had Turkey not been an issue, Stalin would likely have left Karabakh under Armenian control.[55] 
As a result, the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast  was established within the Azerbaijan SSR on 7 July 1923.

With the Soviet Union firmly in control of the region, the conflict over the region died down for several decades. With the
beginning of the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the question of Nagorno-Karabakh re-emerged.
Accusing the Azerbaijani SSR government of conducting forced Azerification of the region, the majority Armenian population, with
ideological and material support from the Armenian SSR, started a movement to have the autonomous oblast transferred to the
Armenian SSR. The oblast's borders were drawn to include Armenian villages and to exclude as much as possible Azerbaijani
villages. The resulting district ensured an Armenian majority.[56]  In August 1987, Karabakh Armenians sent a petition for union
with Armenia with tens of thousands of signatures to Moscow.[57]

WAR AND SECESSION
Main article: Nagorno-Karabakh War
A restored Armenian T-72, knocked out of commission while attacking Azeri positions in Askeran District, serves as a war memorial
on the outskirts of Stepanakert.On 13 February 1988, Karabakh Armenians began demonstrating in their capital, Stepanakert, in favour of unification with the
Armenian republic. Six days later they were joined by mass marches in Yerevan. On 20 February, the Soviet of People's Deputies in
Karabakh voted 110 to 17 to request the transfer of the region to Armenia. This unprecedented action by a regional soviet brought
out tens of thousands of demonstrations both in Stepanakert and Yerevan, but Moscow rejected the Armenians' demands. On 22
February 1988, the first direct confrontation of the conflict occurred as a large group of Azeris marched from Agdam  against the
Armenian populated town of Askeran, "wreaking destruction en route". The confrontation between the Azeris and the police near
Askeran degenerated into the Askeran clash, which left two Azeris dead, one of them reportedly killed by an Azeri police officer,
as well as 50 Armenian villagers, and an unknown number of Azeris and police injured.[58][59]  Large numbers of refugees left
Armenia and Azerbaijan as violence began against the minority populations of the respective countries.[60]

On 29 November 1989, direct rule in Nagorno-Karabakh was ended and the region was returned to Azerbaijani administration.[61]  The
Soviet policy backfired, however, when a joint session of the Armenian Supreme Soviet  and the National Council, the legislative
body of Nagorno-Karabakh, proclaimed the unification of Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia.[citation needed]  In 1989, Nagorno-Karabakh
had a population of 192,000.[62]  The population at that time was 76 percent Armenian and 23 percent Azerbaijanis, with Russian 
and Kurdish  minorities.[62]  On 26 November 1991 Azerbaijan abolished the status of Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast,
rearranging the administrative division  and bringing the territory under direct control of Azerbaijan.[63]

On 10 December 1991, in a referendum boycotted by local Azerbaijanis,[59]  Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh approved the creation of
an independent state. A Soviet proposal for enhanced autonomy for Nagorno-Karabakh within Azerbaijan satisfied neither side, and 
a
full-scale war  subsequently erupted between Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh, with the latter receiving support from Armenia.[64]
[65][66][67]  According to Armenia's former president, Levon Ter-Petrossian, the Karabakh leadership approach was maximalist and
"they thought they could get more."[68][69][70]

The struggle over Nagorno-Karabakh escalated after both Armenia and Azerbaijan attained independence from the Soviet Union in
1991. In the post-Soviet power vacuum, military action between Azerbaijan and Armenia was heavily influenced by the Russian
military. Furthermore, both the Armenian and Azerbaijani military employed a large number of mercenaries from Ukraine  and Russia.

[71]  As many as one thousand Afghan  mujahideen  participated in the fighting on Azerbaijan's side.[59]  There were also fighters
from Chechnya  fighting on the side of Azerbaijan, as well heavy artillery and tanks provided to Armenia by Russia.[59]  Many
survivors from the Azerbaijani side found shelter in 12 emergency camps set up in other parts of Azerbaijan to cope with the
growing number of internally displaced people due to the Nagorno-Karabakh war.[72]

By the end of 1993, the conflict had caused thousands of casualties and created hundreds of thousands of refugees on both sides.[
citation needed]  By May 1994, the Armenians were in control of 14% of the territory of Azerbaijan. At that stage, for the first
time during the conflict, the Azerbaijani government recognized Nagorno-Karabakh as a third party in the war, and started direct
negotiations with the Karabakh authorities.[40]  As a result, a cease-fire was reached on 12 May 1994 through Russian negotiation.

POST-1994 CEASEFIRE
Further information: Madrid Principles, Prague Process (Armenian–Azerbaijani negotiations), Nagorno-Karabakh Declaration, 
Astrakhan Declaration, and Land mine situation in Nagorno-Karabakh
The final borders of the conflict after the Bishkek Protocol. Armenian forces of Nagorno-Karabakh currently control almost 9
percent of Azerbaijan's territory outside the former Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast,[59]  while Azerbaijani forces control 
Shahumian  and the eastern parts of Martakert  and Martuni.Ilham Aliyev, Dmitry Medvedev  and Serzh Sargsyan  in Moscow  on 2
November 2008Despite the ceasefire, fatalities due to armed conflicts between Armenian and Azerbaijani soldiers continued.[73]  On 25 January
2005, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe  (PACE) adopted PACE Resolution 1416, which condemned alleged ethnic
cleansing against Azerbaijanis.[74][75]  On 15–17 May 2007 the 34th session of the Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the 
Organization of Islamic Conference  adopted resolution № 7/34-P, considering the occupation of Azerbaijani territory as the
aggression of Armenia against Azerbaijan and recognizing the actions against Azerbaijani civilians as a crime against humanity,
and condemning the destruction of archaeological, cultural and religious monuments in the occupied territories.[76]  The 11th
session of the summit of the Organization of the Islamic Conference  held on 13–14 March 2008 in Dakar  adopted resolution No.
10/11-P (IS). In the resolution, OIC member states condemned the occupation of Azerbaijani lands by Armenian forces and Armenian
aggression against Azerbaijan, alleged ethnic cleansing against the Azeri population, and charged Armenia with the "destruction of
cultural monuments in the occupied Azerbaijani territories".[77]  On 14 March of the same year the UN General Assembly  adopted 
Resolution № 62/243  which "demands the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of all Armenian forces from all occupied
territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan".[78]  On 18–20 May 2010, the 37th session of the Council of Ministers of Foreign
Affairs of the Organization of Islamic Conference in Dushanbe  adopted another resolution condemning the aggression of Armenia
against Azerbaijan, recognizing the actions against Azerbaijani civilians as a crime against humanity and condemning the
destruction of archaeological, cultural, and religious monuments in occupied territories.[79]  On 20 May of the same year, the 
European Parliament  in Strasbourg  adopted the resolution on "The need for an EU Strategy for the South Caucasus" on the basis of
the report by Evgeni Kirilov, the Bulgarian member of the Parliament.[80][81]  The resolution states in particular that "the
occupied Azerbaijani regions around Nagorno-Karabakh must be cleared as soon as possible".[82]

Several[quantify]  world leaders  have met with the presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan over the years, but efforts to maintain
the ceasefire have failed.[83]

2 April 2016 saw reports of renewed military activities between Azerbaijani and Armenian forces.[84]  The Armenian Defense
Ministry  alleged that Azerbaijan launched an offensive to seize territory in the region. At least 30 soldiers were killed during
the fighting and a Mil Mi-24  helicopter and tank were also destroyed, with 12 of the fallen soldiers belonging to the Azerbaijani
forces and the other 18 belonging to the Armenian forces, as well as an additional 35 Armenian soldiers reportedly wounded.[85]
[86]

GEOGRAPHY
The Sarsang Reservoir
A view of the forested mountains of Nagorno-KarabakhNagorno-Karabakh has a total area of 4,400 square kilometres (1,699 sq mi).[87]  Approximately half of Nagorno-Karabakh terrain is
over 950 metres (3,120 ft) above sea level.[88]  The borders of Nagorno-Karabakh resemble a kidney bean with the indentation on
the east side. It has tall mountain ridges along the northern edge and along the west and a mountainous south. The part near the
indentation of the kidney bean itself is a relatively flat valley, with the two edges of the bean, the provinces of Martakert  and
 Martuni, having flat lands as well. Other flatter valleys exist around the Sarsang reservoir, Hadrut, and the south. The entire
region lies, on average, 1,100 metres (3,600 ft) above sea level.[88]  Notable peaks include the border mountain Murovdag  and the
 Great Kirs  mountain chain in the junction of Shusha Rayon  and Hadrut. The territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh forms a portion
of the historic region of Karabakh, which lies between the rivers Kura  and Araxes, and the modern Armenia-Azerbaijan border.
Nagorno-Karabakh in its modern borders is part of the larger region of Upper Karabakh.

Nagorno-Karabakh’s environment vary from steppe  on the Kura lowland through dense forests of oak, hornbeam, and beech  on the
lower mountain slopes to birchwood  and alpine meadows  higher up. The region possesses numerous mineral springs  and deposits of 
zinc, coal, lead, gold, marble, and limestone.[89]  The major cities of the region are Stepanakert, which serves as the capital of
the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, and Shusha, which lies partially in ruins. Vineyards, orchards, and mulberry groves for silkworms
are developed in the valleys.[90]

DEMOGRAPHICS
Main article: Demographics of Nagorno-Karabakh18TH CENTURY
Population statistics for Nagorno-Karabakh are available from the 18th century. Archimandrite Minas Tigranian, after completing
his secret mission to Persian Armenia ordered by the Russian Tsar Peter the Great  stated in a report dated 14 March 1717 that the
patriarch of the Gandzasar Monastery, in Nagorno-Karabakh, had under his authority 900 Armenian villages.[91]

In his letter of 1769 to Russia’s Count P. Panin, the Georgian King Erekle II, in his description of Nagorno-Karabakh, suggests:
"Seven families rule the region of Khamsa. Its population is totally Armenian."[92][93]

When discussing Karabakh and Shusha  in the 18th century, the Russian diplomat and historian Semyon M. Bronevskiy (Russian: Семён
Михайлович Броневский) indicated in his Historical Notes  that Karabakh, which he said "is located in Greater Armenia" had as many
as 30,000–40,000 armed Armenian men in 1796.[94]

19TH CENTURY
A survey prepared by the Russian imperial authorities in 1823, several years before the 1828 Armenian migration from Persia to the
newly established Armenian Province, shows that all Armenians of Karabakh compactly resided in its highland portion, i.e. on the
territory of the five traditional Armenian principalities in Nagorno-Karabakh, and constituted an absolute demographic majority on
those lands.[95]  The survey's more than 260 pages recorded that the district of Khachen had 12 Armenian villages and no Tatar
(Muslim) villages; Jalapert (Jraberd) had eight Armenian villages and no Tatar villages; Dizak had 14 Armenian villages and one
Tatar village; Gulistan had 12 Armenian and five Tatar villages; and Varanda had 23 Armenian villages and one Tatar village.[96]
[97]

20TH CENTURY
During the Soviet times, the leaders of the Azerbaijan SSR tried to change demographic balance in the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous
Region (NKAO) by increasing the number of Azerbaijani residents through opening a university with Azerbaijani, Russian and
Armenian sectors and a shoe factory, sending Azerbaijanis from other parts of Azerbaijani SSR to the NKAO. "By doing this", Aliyev
said in an interview in 2002, "I tried to increase the number of Azeris and to reduce the number of Armenians".[98][99]

Nearing the collapse of the Soviet Union  in 1989, the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast had a population of 145,593 Armenians
(76.4 percent), 42,871 Azerbaijanis (22.4 percent),[71]  and several thousand Kurds, Russians, Greeks  and Assyrians. Most of the
Azerbaijani and Kurdish populations fled the region during the heaviest years of fighting in the war from 1992 to 1993. The main
language spoken in Nagorno-Karabakh is Armenian; however, Karabakh Armenians speak a dialect of Armenian  that is considerably
different from the Yerevan dialect spoken by most in Armenia, but is similar to the dialects of Southern Syunik and even Eastern 
Tavush, areas that were historically closely linked to Artsakh.[citation needed]

Ethnic groups of the region in 1995. (See entire map)21ST CENTURY
In 2001, the NKR's reported population was 95 percent Armenian, with the remaining total including Assyrians, Greeks, and Kurds.
[100]  In March 2007, the local government announced that its population had grown to 138,000. The annual birth rate was recorded
at 2,200–2,300 per year, an increase from nearly 1,500 in 1999. Until 2000, the country's net migration was at a negative.[101] 
For the first half of 2007, 1,010 births and 659 deaths were reported, with a net emigration of 27.[102]

In 2011, officials from YAP  submitted a letter to OSCE which included the statement, "The OSCE fact-finding mission report
released last year also found that some 15,000 Armenians have been illegally settled on Azerbaijan's occupied territories."
However, the OSCE report, released in March 2011, estimates the population of territories controlled by ethnic Armenians "adjacent
to the breakaway Azerbaijani region of Nagorno-Karabakh" to be 14,000, and states "there has been no significant growth in the
population since 2005."[103]

Most of the Armenian population is Christian  and belongs to the Armenian Apostolic Church. Certain Orthodox Christian  and 
Evangelical Christian  denominations also exist; other religions include Judaism.[100]

TRANSPORT
LOCATIONICAOFAAIATAAIRPORT NAMECOORDINATESStepanakertUB13Stepanakert Airport[104]39°54′05″N 46°47′13″E﻿ /39.90139°N 46.78694°E﻿ /
39.90139; 46.78694﻿ (Stepanakert Air Base)During rule of the Soviet Union, the Yevlax-Ağdam-Xankəndi(Stepanakert) line connected the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Region with
the main part of Azerbaijan. After the Nagorno-Karabakh war and the abandonment of Ağdam, the line’s service was cut back to
service only between Yevlax and Kətəlparaq, without any present section at the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic. The former railway line
between Kətəlparaq and Stepanakert has been almost completely destroyed.

The (Tbilisi-Gyumri-)Yerevan-Naxçıvan-Horadiz-Şirvan(-Bakı) main railway was also dismantled from the NKR between Ordubad  and 
Horadiz, and a by-line from Mincivan  to the Armenian city of Kapan. Currently, the Azerbaijani trains only travel to Horadiz. The
Ordubad-Horadiz section has been demolished, leaving the NKR with no intact, active railway line in their territory. The railway
at the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic still operates, but it is separated from the main Azerbaijani lines, and only has connection
to Iran.

SEE ALSO
 * Outline of Nagorno-Karabakh
 * Index of Nagorno-Karabakh-related articles
 * Janapar  - the hiking trail across Nagorno-Karabakh

[105]

REFERENCES
 1.   ^  "Population of NKR as of 01.01.2013". NKR. 1 January 2013. Retrieved 20 February  2014.
 2.   ^  "Official Statistics of the NKR. Official site of the President of the NKR". President.nkr.am. 1 January 2010. Retrieved 
      6 May  2012.
 3.   ^  "General Assembly adopts resolution reaffirming territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, demanding withdrawal of all
      Armenian
      forces". United Nations. 14 March 2008. Retrieved 30 Aug  2015.
 4.   ^  Robert H. Hewsen. "The Meliks of Eastern Armenia: A Preliminary Study". Revue des etudes Arméniennes. NS: IX, 1972, pp.
      288.
 5.   ^  Robert H. Hewsen, Armenia: A Historical Atlas. The University of Chicago Press, 2001, p. 264. ISBN 978-0-226-33228-4
 6.   ^  The BBC World News. Regions and territories: Nagorno-Karabakh, BBC News Online. Last updated 3 October 2007. Retrieved 21
      November 2007.
 7.   ^ a  b  (Armenian)  Ulubabyan, Bagrat. Karabagh  (Ղարաբաղ). The Soviet Armenian Encyclopedia, vol. vii, Yerevan, Armenian
      SSR, 1981 p. 26
 8.   ^  C. G. Ellis, "Oriental Carpets", 1988. p133.
 9.   ^  Robert H. Hewsen, Armenia: a Historical Atlas.  University of Chicago Press, 2001, pp. 119–120.
 10.  ^  PanArmenian Network. Artsakh: From Ancient Time to 1918. PanArmenian.net. 9 June 2003. Retrieved 21 November 2007.
 11.  ^  Strabo  (ed. H.C. Hamilton, Esq., W. Falconer, M.A.) . Geography. The Perseus Digital Library. 11.14.4. Retrieved 21
      November 2007.
 12.  ^  Viviano, Frank (March 2004). "The Rebirth of Armenia". National Geographic Magazine.
 13.  ^  John Noble, Michael Kohn, Danielle Systermans. Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan. Lonely Planet; 3 edition (May 1, 2008),
      p. 307
 14.  ^ a  b  Hewsen, Robert H. (1982). "Ethno-History and the Armenian Influence upon the Caucasian Albanians". In Samuelian,
      Thomas J. Classical Armenian Culture. Influences and Creativity. Chicago: Scholars Press. pp. 27–40. ISBN0-89130-565-3.
 15.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. Armenia: a Historical Atlas. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2001, p. 32–33, map 19 (shows
      the territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh as part of the Orontids' Kingdom of Armenia)
 16.  ^  R. Schmitt, M. L. Chaumont. Armenia and Iran. Encyclopædia Iranica
 17.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. "The Kingdom of Artsakh", in T. Samuelian & M. Stone, eds. Medieval Armenian Culture. Chico, CA, 1983.
 18.  ^  Hewsen. Armenia, pp. 100-103.
 19.  ^  History by Sebeos, chapter 26
 20.  ^  Encyclopædia Britannica  "Azerbaijan"
 21.  ^  Walker, Christopher J. Armenia and Karabagh: The Struggle for Unity. Minority Rights Group Publications, 1991, p. 10
 22.  ^  Viviano, Frank. "The Rebirth of Armenia", National Geographic Magazine, March 2004, p. 18,
 23.  ^  Movses Kalankatuatsi. History of the Land of Aluank, Book I, chapters 27, 28 and 29; Book II, chapter 3.
 24.  ^  Н.Адонц. «Дионисий Фракийский и армянские толкователи», Пг., 1915, 181—219
 25.  ^  The Oxford History of Historical Writing: 400-1400 / Edited by Sarah Foot, Chase F. Robinson. — Oxford University Press,
      2012. — Vol. 2. — p. 189. "The section on Juansers exploits concludes with the earliest piece of secular Armenian poetry
      since the adoption of Christianity to have reached us, in the form of an abecedarian elegy extolling the prince and
      bewailing his passing."
 26.  ^  Movses Kalankatuatsi. History of the Land of Aluank, translated from Old Armenian by Sh. V. Smbatian. Yerevan:
      Matenadaran (Institute of Ancient Manuscripts), 1984, Elegy on the Death of Prince Juansher
 27.  ^ a  b  Agop Jack Hacikyan, Gabriel Basmajian, Edward S. Franchuk. The Heritage of Armenian Literature. Wayne State
      University Press (December 2002), pp. 94–99
 28.  ^  The Cambridge History of Iran. — Cambridge University Press, 1975. — vol. 4. — p. 506 "He was handed to Afshin's troops
      by Sahl b. Sunbadh, an Armenian prince in 222/836-7, and executed in Samarra (223/837) while his brother and assistant
      'Abd-Allah was delivered to the prince of Tabaristan, Ibn Sharvin, who had him put to death in Baghdad."
 29.  ^ a  b  c  Robert H. Hewsen, Armenia: A Historical Atlas. The University of Chicago Press, 2001, pp. 119, 155, 163, 264–65.
 30.  ^  Christopher Walker. The Armenian presence in Mountainous Karabakh, in John F. R. Wright et al.: Transcaucasian Boundaries 
       (SOAS/GRC Geopolitics). 1995, p. 93
 31.  ^  Hewsen, Robert H. "The Kingdom of Artsakh", in T. Samuelian & M. Stone, eds. Medieval Armenian Culture. Chico, CA, 1983
 32.  ^  Arḡūn Āqā — Encyclopædia Iranica.  P. Jackson  "It can only have caused resentment among the Muslims, and the Christian
      author Kirakos, in stark contrast with Jovaynī, has nothing favorable to say concerning Arḡūn’s exactions: his harsh
      treatment of certain Armenian princes, such as Jalāl of Ḵačen, whom he had executed in 659/1261, made him especially
      hateful."
 33.  ^  Encyclopædia Britannica. Armenia:"A few native Armenian rulers survived for a time in the Kiurikian kingdom of Lori, the
      Siuniqian kingdom of Baghq or Kapan, and the principates of Khachen (Artzakh) and Sasun."
 34.  ^  Robert H. Hewsen. Russian–Armenian relations, 1700–1828. Society of Armenian Studies, N4, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1984,
      p 37
 35.  ^  George A. Bournoutian. A History of Qarabagh: An Annotated Translation of Mirza Jamal Javanshir Qarabaghi's Tarikh-e
      Qarabagh. Mazda Publishers, 1994. ISBN 1-56859-011-3, 978-1-568-59011-0
 36.  ^  Robert H. Hewsen. Russian–Armenian relations, 1700–1828. Society of Armenian Studies, N4, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1984,
      p 37.
 37.  ^  Walker, Christopher J. Armenia: Survival of a Nation. London: Routledge, 1990 p. 40 ISBN 0-415-04684-X
 38.  ^  Raffi, The History of Karabagh's Meliks, Vienna, 1906, in Armenian
 39.  ^  In English, Raffi, The Five Melikdoms of Karabagh  translated by Ara Stepan Melkonian, Garod Books Ltd. 2010, London. 
      ISBN 9781903656570
 40.  ^ a  b  c  d  e  f  g  Cornell, Svante E. "The Nagorno-Karabakh Conflict"  (PDF).(1.05 MB). Uppsala: Department of East
      European Studies, April 1999.
 41.  ^  (Russian)  Abbas-gulu Aga Bakikhanov. Golestan-i Iram; according to an 18th-century local Turkic-Muslim writer Mirza
      Adigezal bey, Nadir shah placed Karabakh under his own control, while a 19th-century local Turkic Muslim writer Abbas-gulu
      Aga Bakikhanov states that the shah placed Karabakh under the control of the governor of Tabriz.
 42.  ^  (Russian)  Mirza Adigezal bey. Karabakh-name, p. 48
 43.  ^  (Russian)  Просительные пункты и клятвенное обещание Ибраим-хана.
 44.  ^  Muriel Atkin. The Strange Death of Ibrahim Khalil Khan of Qarabagh. Iranian Studies, Vol. 12, No. 1/2 (Winter – Spring,
      1979), pp. 79–107
 45.  ^  George A. Bournoutian. A History of Qarabagh: An Annotated Translation of Mirza Jamal Javanshir Qarabaghi's Tarikh-e
      Qarabagh. Mazda Publishers, 1994. ISBN 1-56859-011-3, 978-1-568-59011-0
 46.  ^  Tim Potier. Conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, Abkhazia and South Ossetia: A Legal Appraisal. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,
      2001, p. 2. ISBN 90-411-1477-7.
 47.  ^  Leonidas Themistocles Chrysanthopoulos. Caucasus Chronicles: Nation-building and Diplomacy in Armenia, 1993–1994. Gomidas
      Institute, 2002, p. 8. ISBN 1-884630-05-7.
 48.  ^  The British and Foreign Review. J. Ridgeway and sons, 1838, p. 422.
 49.  ^  Taru Bahl, M.H. Syed. Encyclopaedia of the Muslim World. Anmol Publications PVT, 2003 p. 34. ISBN 81-261-1419-3.
 50.  ^  The penny cyclopædia of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. 1833, Georgia.
 51.  ^ a  b  c  "The Nagorno-Karabagh Crisis: A Blueprint for Resolution"  (PDF)., New England Center for International Law &
      Policy
 52.  ^  Circular by colonel D. I. Shuttleworth of the British Command
 53.  ^  Conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, Abkhazia, and South Ossetia: A Legal Appraisal  by Tim Potier. ISBN 90-411-1477-7
 54.  ^  Walker. The Survival of a Nation. pp. 285–90
 55.  ^  Service, Robert. Stalin: A Biography. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2006 p. 204 ISBN 0-674-02258-0
 56.  ^  Audrey L. Altstadt. The Azerbaijani Turks: power and identity under Russian rule. Hoover Press, 1992. ISBN 0817991824,
      9780817991821
 57.  ^  Black Garden, Thomas de Waal, page 292
 58.  ^  Elizabeth Fuller, Nagorno-Karabakh: The Death and Casualty Toll to Date, RL 531/88, 14 December 1988, pp. 1–2
 59.  ^ a  b  c  d  e  de Waal, Thomas  (2003). Black Garden: Armenia and Azerbaijan Through Peace and War. New York: New York
      University Press. ISBN0-8147-1945-7.
 60.  ^  Lieberman, Benjamin (2006). Terrible Fate: Ethnic Cleansing in the Making of Modern Europe. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee.
      pp. 284–92. ISBN1-5666-3646-9.
 61.  ^  The Encyclopedia of World History. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 2001. p. 906.
 62.  ^ a  b  Miller, Donald E. and Lorna Touryan Miller. Armenia: Portraits of Survival and Hope. Berkeley: University of
      California Press, 2003 p. 7 ISBN 0-520-23492-8
 63.  ^  Roeder, Philip G. (2007). Where nation-states come from: institutional change in the age of nationalism. Princeton
      University Press. p. 51. ISBN0-691-13467-7. Retrieved 2011-10-10.
 64.  ^  Human Rights Watch. Playing the "Communal Card". Communal Violence and Human Rights: "By early 1992 full-scale fighting
      broke out between Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians and Azerbaijani authorities." / "...Karabakh Armenian forces—often with the
      support of forces from the Republic of Armenia—conducted large-scale operations..." / "Because 1993 witnessed unrelenting
      Karabakh Armenian offensives against the Azerbaijani provinces surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh..." / "Since late 1993, the
      conflict has also clearly become internationalized: in addition to Azerbaijani and Karabakh Armenian forces, troops from the
      Republic of Armenia participate on the Karabakh side in fighting inside Azerbaijan and in Nagorno-Karabakh."
 65.  ^  Human Rights Watch. The former Soviet Union. Human Rights Developments: "In 1992 the conflict grew far more lethal as
      both sides—the Azerbaijani National Army and free-lance militias fighting along with it, and ethnic Armenians and
      mercenaries fighting in the Popular Liberation Army of Artsakh—began."
 66.  ^  United States Institute of Peace. Nagorno-Karabakh Searching for a Solution. Foreword: "Nagorno-Karabakh’s armed forces
      have not only fortified their region, but have also occupied a large swath of surrounding Azeri territory in the hopes of
      linking the enclave to Armenia."
 67.  ^  United States Institute of Peace. Sovereignty after Empire. Self-Determination Movements in the Former Soviet Union.
      Hopes and Disappointments: Case Studies  "Meanwhile, the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh was gradually transforming into a
      full-scale war between Azeri and Karabakh irregulars, the latter receiving support from Armenia." / "Azerbaijan's objective
      advantage in terms of human and economic potential has so far been offset by the superior fighting skills and discipline of
      Nagorno-Karabakh's forces. After a series of offensives, retreats, and counteroffensives, Nagorno-Karabakh now controls a
      sizable portion of Azerbaijan proper ... including the Lachin corridor."
 68.  ^  "By Giving Karabakh Lands to Azerbaijan, Conflict Would Have Ended in '97, Says Ter-Petrosian". Asbarez. Asbarez. 19
      April 2011.
 69.  ^  "Ter-Petrosyan on the BBC: Karabakh conflict could have been resolved by giving certain territories to Azerbaijan". 
      ArmeniaNow. ArmeniaNow. 19 April 2011.
 70.  ^  "Первый президент Армении о распаде СССР и Карабахе". BBC. BBC. 18 April 2011.
 71.  ^ a  b  Human Rights Watch. Seven Years of Conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh. December 1994, p. xiii, ISBN 1-56432-142-8, citing:
      Natsional'nyi Sostav Naseleniya SSSR, po dannym Vsesoyuznyi Perepisi Naseleniya 1989 g., Moskva, "Finansy i Statistika"
 72.  ^  Azerbaijan closes last of emergency camps, UNHCR
 73.  ^  No End in Sight to Fighting in Nagorno-Karabakh  by Ivan Watson/National Public Radio. Weekend Edition  Sunday, 23 April
      2006.
 74.  ^  Проект заявления по Нагорному Карабаху ожидает одобрения парламентских сил Армении
 75.  ^  Резолюция ПАСЕ по Карабаху: что дальше?. BBC Russian.
 76.  ^  Resolutions on Political Affairs. The Thirty-Fourth Session of the Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers.
 77.  ^  Resolutions on Political Affairs. Islamic Summit Conference. 13–14 May 2008
 78.  ^  The text of the resolution № 62/243
 79.  ^  RESOLUTIONS ON POLITICAL ISSUES ADOPTED BY THE COUNCIL OF FOREIGN MINISTERS (SESSION OF SHARED VISION OF A MORE SECURE
      AND PROSPEROUS ISLAMIC WORLD) DUSHANBE, REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN 4-6 JAMADUL THANI 1431H (18-20 MAY 2010)
 80.  ^  "FM: Azerbaijan welcomes resolution 'Need for EU Strategy for South Caucasus' adopted by European Parliament." Trend.az.
      21 May 2010.
 81.  ^  "EU's Ashton Says Nagorno-Karabakh Elections Illegal." RFE/RL. 21 May 2010.
 82.  ^  Bulgarian MEPs Urge EU to Be Proactive in South Caucasus.
 83.  ^  "Azerbaijan military threat to Armenia." The Daily Telegraph. 22 November 2009. Retrieved 23 November 2009.
 84.  ^  http://lenta.ru/news/2016/04/02/karabah/
 85.  ^  Hodge, Nathan (April 2, 2016). "A Dozen Dead in Heavy Fighting Reported in Nagorno-Karabakh". Wall Street Journal.
      Retrieved 2 April  2016.
 86.  ^  "Dozens killed in Nagorno-Karabakh clashes". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 2016-04-03.
 87.  ^  Country Overview
 88.  ^ a  b  Zürcher, Christoph (2007). The post-Soviet wars: rebellion, ethnic conflict, and nationhood in the Caucasus. NYU
      Press. p. 184. ISBN0814797091.
 89.  ^  DeRouen, Karl R. (ed.) (2007). Civil wars of the world: major conflicts since World War II, Volume 2. ABC-CLIO. p. 150. 
      ISBN1851099190.
 90.  ^  "Nagorno-Karabakh". Britannica. Retrieved 2010-11-30.
 91.  ^  Bournoutian, George A. Armenians and Russia, 1626-1796: A Documentary Record. Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda Publishers, 2001, p.
      120–21
 92.  ^  Цагарели А. А. Грамота и гругие исторические документы XVIII столетия, относяшиеся к Грузии, Том 1. СПб 1891, ц. 434-435.
      This book is available online from Google Books
 93.  ^  Bournoutian, George A. Armenians and Russia, 1626-1796: A Documentary Record. Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda Publishers, 2001,
      page 246
 94.  ^  Semyon Mikhailovich Bronesvskiy. Historical Notes...  St. Petersburg. 1996. Исторические выписки о сношениях России с
      Персиею, Грузиею и вообще с горскими народами, в Кавказе обитающими, со времён Ивана Васильевича доныне». СПб. 1996, секция
      "Карабаг"
 95.  ^  George A. Bournoutian. The 1823 Russian Survey of the Karabagh Province: A Primary Source on the Demography and Economy
      of Karabagh in the Early 19th Century. Mazda Publishers; Bilingual edition (15 September 2011). United States of America.
 96.  ^  Description of the Karabakh province prepared in 1823 according to the order of the governor in Georgia Yermolov by state
      advisor Mogilevsky and colonel Yermolov 2nd  (Opisaniye Karabakhskoy provincii sostavlennoye v 1823 g po rasporyazheniyu
      glavnoupravlyayushego v Gruzii Yermolova deystvitelnim statskim sovetnikom Mogilevskim i polkovnikom Yermolovim 2-m),
      Tbilisi, 1866.
 97.  ^  Bournoutian, George A. A History of Qarabagh: An Annotated Translation of Mirza Jamal Javanshir Qarabaghi's Tarikh-E
      Qarabagh. Costa Mesa, CA: Mazda Publishers, 1994, page 18
 98.  ^  (Russian)  "Гейдар Алиев: 'Государство с оппозицией лучше'." Zerkalo. 22 July 2002.
 99.  ^  (Russian)  Anon. "Кто на стыке интересов? США, Россия и новая реальность на границе с Ираном" ("Who is at the turn of
      interests? US, Russia and new reality on the border with Iran"). Regnum. 4 April 2006.
 100. ^ a  b  Ethnic composition of the region as provided by the government
 101. ^  Regnum News Agency. Nagorno-Karabakh prime minister: We need to have at least 300,000 population. Regnum. 9 March 2007.
      Retrieved 9 March 2007.
 102. ^  Евразийская панорама
 103. ^  "Azerbaijani Party Appeals To OSCE About Armenian Resettlement". RFERL. 13 May 2011. Retrieved 13 May  2011.
 104. ^  "Airports in Azerbaijan". Worldaerodata.com. Retrieved 2013-08-13.
 105. ^  Ali; Ekinciel (1 August 2015). Karabakh Diary  (1 ed.). Russia: Sage. ISBN9786059932196.

EXTERNAL LINKS
Find more aboutNagorno-Karabakhat Wikipedia's sister projects * Definitions  from Wiktionary
 * Media  from Commons
 * News  from Wikinews
 * Quotations  from Wikiquote
 * Texts  from Wikisource
 * Textbooks  from Wikibooks
 * Learning resources  from Wikiversity

 * Articles and Photography on Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh) from UK Photojournalist Russell Pollard
 * All UN Security Council resolutions on Nagorno-Karabakh, courtesy U.S. State department
 * Nagorno-Karabakh Agreement of 2 November 2008  and country profile  from BBC News Online
 * Article on the 10 December Referendum from Russia Profile
 * The conflict over the Nagorno-Karabakh region dealt with by the OSCE Minsk Conference  — Report by rapporteur David Atkinson
   presented to Political Affairs Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
 * Conciliation Resources - Accord issue: The limits of leadership - Elites and societies in the Nagorny Karabakh peace process 
   also key texts & agreements and chronology (in English & Russian)
 * Independence of Kosovo and the Nagorno-Karabakh Issue
 * Interview with Thomas De Waal
 * Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty. Nagorno-Karabakh: Timeline Of The Long Road To Peace
 * Resolution #1416  from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
 * USIP — Nagorno-Karabakh Searching for a Solution: Key points, by Patricia Carley, Publication of the United States Institute
   of
   Peace  (USIP)
 * USIP — Sovereignty after Empire Self-Determination Movements in the Former Soviet Union. Case Studies: Nagorno-Karabakh.  by 
   Galina Starovoitova, Publication of the United States Institute of Peace  (USIP)
 * Photo Series  Nagorno-Karabakh 2008-2011 - daily life, front line, mine clearance, culture, religion.

 * v
 * t
 * e

Territorial disputes  in Western AsiaParties involved shown in parentheses after each entryLand * David Gareja monastery complex * Georgia
    * Azerbaijan
   
   
 * Disputed areas of North Iraq * Iraq
    * Iraqi Kurdistan
   
   
 * Western Golan * Israel
    * Syria
   
   
 * Hatay * Turkey
    * Syria
   
   
 * Nagorno-Karabakh * Armenia
    * Azerbaijan
    * NKR
   
   
 * Northern Cyprus * Republic of Cyprus
    * Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
   
   
 * Saudi–Iraqi neutral zone1 * Iraq
    * Saudi Arabia
   
   
 * Shebaa farms * Israel
    * Lebanon
    * Syria
   
   
 * Judea and Samaria  area * Israel
    * Palestine
   
   

 * Islands
 * Waters

 * Abu Musa / Greater and Lesser Tunbs * Iran
    * United Arab Emirates
   
   
 * Fasht Ad Dibal / Qit'at Jaradeh * Qatar
    * Bahrain
   
   
 * Imia / Kardak * Greece
    * Turkey
   
   
 * Khuriya Muriya Islands * Oman
    * Yemen
   
   

 * 1  Divided among multiple claimants.

 * v
 * t
 * e

Nagorno-Karabakh conflictHistoryLocationsPolitical leadersMilitary leadersDocumentsOrigins:

 * History of Nagorno-Karabakh

Soviet era:

 * Askeran clash
 * Baku pogrom
 * Black January
 * Dissolution of the USSR
 * Karabakh movement
 * Sumgait pogrom
 * Zvartnots Airport clash
 * Kirovabad pogrom

Nagorno-Karabakh conflict

 * Nagorno-Karabakh War * Battle of Kelbajar
    * Capture of Shusha
    * Shelling of Stepanakert
    * Khojaly Massacre
    * Maraghar Massacre
    * Mardakert and Martuni Offensives
    * Operation Goranboy
    * Operation Ring
    * 1993 Summer Offensives
   
   
 * 2008 Mardakert skirmishes
 * February 2010 Nagorno-Karabakh skirmish
 * 2010 Mardakert skirmishes
 * 2012 Armenian–Azerbaijani border clashes
 * 2014 Armenian–Azerbaijani clashes
 * 2014 Armenian Mil Mi-24 shootdown
 * 2016 Armenian–Azerbaijani clashes

1  Republic of Armenia's involvement is partial
2  Unrecognized state, but a de facto functioning republic

Administrative territorial entities of the NKR:

 * Stepanakert
 * Askeran Region
 * Hadrut Region
 * Kashatagh Region
 * Martakert Region
 * Martuni Region
 * Shahumyan Region
 * Shushi Region

Districts of Azerbaijan under Armenian control:

 * Agdam
 * Fizuli
 * Jabrayil
 * Kalbajar
 * Lachin
 * Qubadli
 * Zangilan

Armenia1:

 * Levon Ter-Petrosyan
 * Robert Kocharyan
 * Serzh Sargsyan

Nagorno-Karabakh Republic2:

 * Artur Mkrtchyan
 * Robert Kocharyan
 * Leonard Petrosyan
 * Arkadi Ghukasyan
 * Bako Sahakyan

Azerbaijan:

 * Abulfaz Elchibey
 * Ayaz Mutallibov
 * Heydar Aliyev
 * Ilham Aliyev

Azerbaijani Community of Nagorno-Karabakh:

 * Bayram Safarov
 * Nizami Bahmanov

Russia:

 * Boris Yeltsin

Soviet Union:

 * Mikhail Gorbachev

Turkey:

 * Turgut Özal

Armenia:

 * Vazgen Sargsyan
 * Gurgen Dalibaltayan
 * Norat Ter-Grigoryants
 * Jirair Sefilian

Nagorno-Karabakh Republic:

 * Samvel Babayan
 * Kristapor Ivanyan
 * Arkadi Ter-Tadevosyan
 * Monte Melkonian

Azerbaijan:

 * Isgandar Hamidov
 * Rahim Gaziyev
 * Surat Huseynov
 * Valeh Barshadly

Russia:

 * Pavel Grachev

Soviet Union:

 * Viktor Polyanichko

Chechen Republic of Ichkeria:

 * Shamil Basayev

Afghanistan:

 * Gulbuddin Hekmatyar

Peace process:

 * Baker rules
 * Bishkek Protocol
 * Tehran Communiqué
 * Zheleznovodsk Communiqué
 * OSCE Minsk Group
 * Prague Process
 * Madrid Principles

International documents:

 * Astrakhan Declaration
 * UN SC Resolutions 822, 853, 874, 884
 * Nagorno-Karabakh Declaration
 * NATO Lisbon Summit Declaration
 * OIC 10/11, OIC 10/37 Resolutions
 * PACE Resolution 1416
 * UN GA Resolution 62/243