For other uses, see Organization (disambiguation)  and Org (disambiguation).This article includes a list of references, but its
sources remain unclear  because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve  this article by introducing  more
precise citations.  (October 2014)  (Learn how and when to remove this template message)Business administrationManagement  of a 
businessTypes of business * Company * Joint-stock company
    * Limited liability company
    * Privately held company
    * Conglomerate
    * State-owned enterprise
   
   

Business entity * Cooperative
 * Sole proprietorship
 * Partnership
 * Corporation

Corporate governance * Annual general meeting
 * Board of directors
 * Supervisory board
 * Advisory board

Corporate titles * Chairman
 * 
   Chief executive officer (CEO)
 * Chief financial officer (CFO)
 * Chief information officer (CIO)
 * Chief human resources officer (CHRO)
 * Chief business officer (CBO)
 * Chief technology officer (CTO)

Economy * Commodity
 * Public economics
 * Labour economics
 * Development economics
 * International economics
 * Mixed economy
 * Planned economy
 * Econometrics
 * Environmental economics
 * Open economy
 * Market economy
 * Knowledge economy
 * Microeconomics
 * Macroeconomics
 * Economic development
 * Economic statistics

Corporate law * Commercial law
 * Constitutional documents
 * Contract
 * Corporate crime
 * Corporate liability
 * Insolvency law
 * International trade law
 * Mergers and acquisitions

Finance * Financial statement
 * Insurance
 * Factoring
 * Cash conversion cycle
 * Insider dealing
 * Capital budgeting
 * Commercial bank
 * Derivative
 * Financial statement analysis
 * Financial risk
 * Public finance
 * Corporate finance
 * Managerial finance
 * International finance
 * Liquidation
 * Stock market
 * Financial market
 * Tax
 * Financial institution
 * Working capital
 * Venture capital

Accounting * Management accounting
 * Financial accounting
 * Financial audit

Trade * Business analysis
 * Business ethics
 * Business plan
 * Business judgment rule
 * Consumer behaviour
 * Business operations
 * International business
 * Business model
 * International trade
 * Business process
 * Business statistics

Organization * Architecture
 * Behavior
 * Communication
 * Culture
 * Conflict
 * Development
 * Engineering
 * Hierarchy
 * Patterns
 * Space
 * Structure

Society * Marketing
 * Marketing research
 * Public relations

Types of management * Asset
 * Brand
 * Business intelligence
 * Capacity
 * Change * innovation
   
   
 * Commercial * marketing
   
   
 * Communications
 * Configuration
 * Conflict
 * Content
 * Customer relationship
 * Distributed
 * Earned value
 * Electronic business
 * Enterprise resource planning * management information system
   
   
 * Financial
 * Human resource * development
   
   
 * Incident
 * Integrated
 * Knowledge
 * Materials
 * Network
 * Office
 * Operations
 * Performance
 * Power
 * Problem
 * Process
 * Product life-cycle
 * Product
 * Project
 * Quality
 * Records
 * Resource
 * Risk * crisis
   
   
 * Sales
 * Security
 * Service
 * Strategic
 * Supply chain
 * Systems * administrator
   
   
 * Talent
 * Technology

 *   Business and economics portal

 * v
 * t
 * e

Structure of the United Nations.An organization  or organisation  (see spelling differences) is an entity  comprising multiple people, such as an institution  or
an association, that has a collective goal and is linked to an external environment[citation needed].

The word is derived from the Greek word organon, which means "organ".



TYPES
There are a variety of legal types of organizations, including corporations, governments, non-governmental organizations, 
political organizations, international organizations, armed forces, charities, not-for-profit corporations, partnerships, 
cooperatives, and educational institutions.

A hybrid organization  is a body that operates in both the public sector  and the private sector  simultaneously, fulfilling
public duties and developing commercial market activities.

A voluntary association  is an organization consisting of volunteers. Such organizations may be able to operate without legal
formalities, depending on jurisdiction, including informal clubs.

Organizations may also operate in secret and/or illegally in the case of secret societies, criminal organizations  and resistance
movements.

STRUCTURES
Diagram of the Federal Government and American Union, 1864.Main article: Organizational structureThe study of organizations
includes a focus on optimizing organizational structure. According to management science, most human  organizations fall roughly
into four types:

 * Committees  or juries
 * Ecologies
 * Matrix  organizations
 * Pyramids  or hierarchies

COMMITTEES OR JURIES
These consist of a group of peers who decide as a group, perhaps by voting. The difference between a jury  and a committee  is
that the members of the committee are usually assigned to perform or lead further actions after the group comes to a decision,
whereas members of a jury come to a decision. In common law  countries, legal juries render decisions of guilt, liability and
quantify damages; juries are also used in athletic contests, book awards and similar activities. Sometimes a selection committee
functions like a jury. In the Middle Ages, juries in continental Europe were used to determine the law according to consensus
among local notables.

Committees are often the most reliable way to make decisions. Condorcet's jury theorem  proved that if the average member votes
better than a roll of dice, then adding more members increases the number of majorities that can come to a correct vote (however
correctness is defined). The problem is that if the average member is subsequently worse  than a roll of dice, the committee's
decisions grow worse, not better; therefore, staffing is crucial.

Parliamentary  procedure, such as Robert's Rules of Order, helps prevent committees from engaging in lengthy discussions without
reaching decisions.

ECOLOGIES
This organization has intense competition. Bad parts of the organization starve. Good ones get more work. Everybody is paid for
what they actually do, and runs a tiny business that has to show a profit, or they are fired.

Companies who utilize this organization type reflect a rather one-sided view of what goes on in ecology. It is also the case that
a natural ecosystem  has a natural border - ecoregions  do not in general compete with one another in any way, but are very
autonomous.

The pharmaceutical company  GlaxoSmithKline  talks about functioning as this type of organization in this external article  from 
The Guardian. By:Bastian Batac De Leon.

MATRIX ORGANIZATION
See also: Matrix managementThis organizational type assigns each worker two bosses in two different hierarchies. One hierarchy is
"functional" and assures that each type of expert in the organization is well-trained, and measured by a boss who is super-expert
in the same field. The other direction is "executive" and tries to get projects completed using the experts. Projects might be
organized by products, regions, customer types, or some other schema.

As an example, a company might have an individual with overall responsibility for products X and Y, and another individual with
overall responsibility for engineering, quality control, etc. Therefore, subordinates responsible for quality control of project X
will have two reporting lines.

PYRAMIDS OR HIERARCHICAL
A hierarchy  exemplifies an arrangement with a leader  who leads other individual members of the organization. This arrangement is
often associated with basis that there are enough imagine a real pyramid, if there are not enough stone blocks to hold up the
higher ones, gravity would irrevocably bring down the monumental structure. So one can imagine that if the leader does not have
the support of his subordinates, the entire structure will collapse. Hierarchies were satirized  in The Peter Principle  (1969), a
book that introduced hierarchiology  and the saying that "in a hierarchy every employee tends to rise to his level of
incompetence."

THEORIES
See also: Organizational theoryIn the social sciences, organizations are the object of analysis for a number of disciplines, such
as sociology, economics,[1]  political science, psychology, management, and organizational communication. The broader analysis of
organizations is commonly referred to as organizational structure, organizational studies, organizational behavior, or
organization analysis. A number of different perspectives exist, some of which are compatible:

 * From a functional perspective, the focus is on how entities like businesses or state authorities are used.
 * From an institutional perspective, an organization is viewed as a purposeful structure within a social context.
 * From a process-related perspective, an organization is viewed as an entity is being (re-)organized, and the focus is on the
   organization as a set of tasks or actions.

Sociology can be defined as the science of the institutions  of modernity; specific institutions serve a function, akin to the
individual organs of a coherent body. In the social and political sciences in general, an "organization" may be more loosely
understood as the planned, coordinated and purposeful action of human beings working through collective action to reach a common
goal or construct a tangible product. This action is usually framed by formal membership and form (institutional rules). Sociology
distinguishes the term organization into planned formal and unplanned informal (i.e. spontaneously formed) organizations.
Sociology analyzes organizations in the first line from an institutional perspective. In this sense, organization is an enduring
arrangement of elements. These elements and their actions are determined by rules so that a certain task can be fulfilled through
a system of coordinated division of labor.

Economic approaches to organizations also take the division of labor  as a starting point. The division of labor allows for
(economies of) specialization. Increasing specialization necessitates coordination. From an economic point of view, markets and
organizations are alternative coordination mechanisms for the execution of transactions.[1]

An organization is defined by the elements that are part of it (who belongs to the organization and who does not?), its 
communication  (which elements communicate and how do they communicate?), its autonomy (which changes are executed autonomously by
the organization or its elements?), and its rules of action compared to outside events (what causes an organization to act as a
collective actor?).

By coordinated and planned cooperation of the elements, the organization is able to solve tasks that lie beyond the abilities of
the single elements. The price paid by the elements is the limitation of the degrees of freedom  of the elements. Advantages of
organizations are enhancement (more of the same), addition (combination of different features) and extension. Disadvantages can be
inertness (through co-ordination) and loss of interaction.

Among the theories that are or have been influential are:

 * Activity theory  is the major theoretical influence, acknowledged by de Clodomir Santos de Morais  in the development of 
   Organization Workshop  method.
 * Actor–network theory, an approach to social theory and research, originating in the field of science studies, which treats
   objects as part of social networks.
 * Complexity theory and organizations, the use of complexity theory  in the field of strategic management  and organizational
   studies.
 * Contingency theory, a class of behavioral theory that claims that there is no best way to organize a corporation, to lead a
   company, or to make decisions.
 * Critical management studies, a loose but extensive grouping of theoretically informed critiques of management, business, and
   organization, grounded originally in a critical theory  perspective
 * Economic sociology, studies both the social effects and the social causes of various economic phenomena.
 * Enterprise architecture, the conceptual model that defines the coalescence of organizational structure and organizational
   behavior.
 * Garbage Can Model, describes a model which disconnects problems, solutions and decision makers from each other.
 * Principal–agent problem, concerns the difficulties in motivating one party (the "agent"), to act in the best interests of
   another (the "principal") rather than in his or her own interests
 * Scientific management  (mainly following Frederick W. Taylor), a theory of management  that analyzes and synthesizes workflows.
 * Social entrepreneurship, the process of pursuing innovative solutions to social problems.
 * Transaction cost theory, the idea that people begin to organize their production in firms when the transaction cost of
   coordinating production through the market exchange, given imperfect information, is greater than within the firm.
 * Weber's Ideal of Bureaucracy  (refer to Max Weber's chapter on "Bureaucracy" in his book Economy and Society)

LEADERSHIP
Main article: LeadershipA leader  in a formal, hierarchical organization, who is appointed to a managerial position, has the right to command and enforce
obedience by virtue of the authority of his position. However, he must possess adequate personal attributes to match his
authority, because authority is only potentially available to him. In the absence of sufficient personal competence, a manager may
be confronted by an emergent leader who can challenge his role in the organization and reduce it to that of a figurehead. However,
only authority of position has the backing of formal sanctions. It follows that whoever wields personal influence and power can
legitimize this only by gaining a formal position in the hierarchy, with commensurate authority.[2]

FORMAL ORGANIZATIONS
An organization that is established as a means for achieving defined objectives  has been referred to as a formal organization.
Its design specifies how goals are subdivided and reflected in subdivisions of the organization. Divisions, departments, sections,
positions, jobs, and tasks make up this work structure. Thus, the formal organization is expected to behave impersonally in regard
to relationships with clients or with its members. According to Weber's definition, entry and subsequent advancement is by merit
or seniority. Each employee receives a salary and enjoys a degree of tenure that safeguards him from the arbitrary influence of
superiors or of powerful clients. The higher his position in the hierarchy, the greater his presumed expertise in adjudicating
problems that may arise in the course of the work carried out at lower levels of the organization. It is this bureaucratic
structure that forms the basis for the appointment of heads or chiefs of administrative subdivisions in the organization and
endows them with the authority attached to their position.[3]

INFORMAL ORGANIZATIONS
In contrast to the appointed head or chief of an administrative unit, a leader emerges within the context of the informal
organization  that underlies the formal structure. The informal organization expresses the personal objectives  and goals  of the
individual membership. Their objectives and goals may or may not coincide with those of the formal organization. The informal
organization represents an extension of the social structures that generally characterize human life – the spontaneous emergence
of groups and organizations as ends in themselves.[3]

In prehistoric times, man was preoccupied with his personal security, maintenance, protection, and survival. Now man spends a
major portion of his waking hours working for organizations. His need to identify with a community that provides security,
protection, maintenance, and a feeling of belonging continues unchanged from prehistoric times. This need is met by the informal
organization and its emergent, or unofficial, leaders.[2]

Leaders emerge from within the structure of the informal organization. Their personal qualities, the demands of the situation, or
a combination of these and other factors attract followers who accept their leadership within one or several overlay structures.
Instead of the authority of position held by an appointed head or chief, the emergent leader wields influence or power. Influence
is the ability of a person to gain cooperation from others by means of persuasion or control over rewards. Power is a stronger
form of influence because it reflects a person's ability to enforce action through the control of a means of punishment.[2]

SEE ALSO
 * Affinity group
 * Business organization
 * Coalition
 * Collective
 * Decentralized autonomous organization
 * List of designated terrorist organizations
 * List of environmental organizations
 * List of general fraternities
 * List of international professional associations
 * List of trade unions
 * Maturity Model
 * Multidimensional organization
 * Mutual organization
 * Organizational psychology
 * Organization Workshop
 * Pacifist organization
 * Requisite organization
 * Service club
 * Size of groups, organizations, and communities
 * Umbrella organization
 * Voluntary association

REFERENCES
 1. ^ a  b  Douma, Sytse; Schreuder, Hein  (2013) [1991]. Economic Approaches to Organizations  (5th ed.). Harlow: Pearson
    Education Limited. ISBN978-0-273-73529-8.
 2. ^ a  b  c  Knowles, Henry P.; Saxberg, Borje O. (1971). Personality and Leadership Behavior. Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley
    Pub. Co. pp. 884–89. OCLC118832.
 3. ^ a  b  Gibb, Cecil A. (1970). Leadership: Selected Readings. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. ISBN0140805176. OCLC174777513.

General * Coase, Ronald  (1937). "The Nature of the Firm" Economica, 4(16), pp. 386–405.
 * Handy, Charles  (1990). Inside Organizations: 21 Ideas for Managers. London: BBC Books. ISBN978-0-563-20830-3.
 * Handy, Charles  (2005). Understanding Organizations  (4th ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN978-0-14-015603-4.
 * Hewlett, Roderic. (2006). The Cognitive leader. Rowman & Littlefield Pub Inc.
 * Johnson, Richard Arvid (1976). Management, systems, and society : an introduction. Pacific Palisades, Calif.: Goodyear Pub. Co.
    ISBN0-87620-540-6. OCLC2299496.
 * Katz, Daniel; Kahn, Robert Louis (1966). The social psychology of organizations. New York: Wiley. OCLC255184.
 * March, James G.; Simon, Herbert A. (1958). Organizations. New York: Wiley. ISBN0-471-56793-0. OCLC1329335.
 * Marshak, Thomas (1987). "organization theory," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 3, pp. 757–60.
 * Mintzberg, Henry (1981). "Organization Design: Fashion or Fit" Harvard Business Review  (January February)
 * Morgenstern, Julie (1998). Organizing from the Inside Out. Owl Books ISBN 0-8050-5649-1
 * Peter, Laurence J.  and Raymond Hull. The Peter Principle  Pan Books 1970 ISBN 0-330-02519-8
 * Rogers, Carl R.; Roethlisberger, Fritz Jules (1990). Barriers and gateways to communication. Boston, Mass.: Harvard Business
   Review. OCLC154085959.
 * Samson, D., Daft, R. (2005). Management: second Pacific Rim edition. Melbourne, Victoria: Thomson
 * Satir, Virginia (1967). Conjoint family therapy; a guide to theory and technique. Palo Alto, Calif: Science and Behavior Books.
    OCLC187068.
 * Scott, William Richard  (2008). Institutions and Organizations  (3rd ed.). London: Sage Publications Ltd. ISBN978-1-4129-5090-9
   .

EXTERNAL LINKS
Look up organization  in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.Wikiquote has quotations related to: Organization * Research on
   Organizations: Bibliography Database and Maps
 * TheTransitioner.org: a site dedicated to collective intelligence  and structure of organizations

 * v
 * t
 * e

Aspects of organizations * Architecture
 * Behavior
 * Blame
 * Burnout
 * Capital
 * Cells
 * Chart
 * Citizenship behavior
 * Climate
 * Commitment
 * Communication
 * Complexity
 * Conflict
 * Culture
 * Design
 * Development
 * Diagnostics
 * Dissent
 * Ecology
 * Effectiveness
 * Engineering
 * Ethics
 * Field
 * Fit in or fuck off
 * Hierarchy
 * Identification
 * Intelligence
 * Justice
 * Kick the cat
 * Kiss up kick down
 * Learning
 * Life cycle
 * Machiavellianism
 * Mentorship
 * Narcissism
 * Network analysis
 * Ombudsman
 * Onboarding
 * Patterns
 * Perceived support
 * Performance
 * Politics
 * Proactivity
 * Psychology
 * Psychopathy
 * Resilience
 * Retaliatory behavior
 * Safety
 * Space
 * Storytelling
 * Structure
 * Suggestion box

See also templatesAspects of corporationsAspects of jobsAspects of occupationsAspects of workplaces * v
 * t
 * e

Aspects of workplacesTopics * Absenteeism
 * Abusive supervision
 * Aggression
 * Bullying
 * Conflict
 * Control freak
 * Counterproductive behaviour
 * Coworker backstabbing
 * Culture of fear
 * Cyber-aggression
 * Democracy
 * Deviance
 * Discrimination
 * Diversity
 * Divide and rule
 * Emotions
 * Employee engagement
 * Employee monitoring
 * Employee morale
 * Employee silence
 * Employee surveys
 * Empowerment
 * Evaluation
 * Feminisation
 * Fit in or fuck off
 * Friendship
 * Gender inequality
 * Gossip
 * Happiness
 * Harassment
 * Health surveillance
 * Humourr
 * Incivility
 * Intervention
 * Jargon
 * Kick the cat
 * Kiss up kick down
 * Listening
 * Machiavellianism
 * Micromanagement
 * Mobbing
 * Narcissism
 * Office politics
 * Performance appraisal
 * Personality clash
 * Phobia
 * Positive psychology
 * Privacy
 * Probation
 * Profanity
 * Psychopathy
 * Queen bee syndrome
 * Rat race
 * Relationships
 * Revenge
 * Role conflict
 * Romance
 * Sabotage
 * Safety and health
 * Spirituality
 * Staff turnover
 * Strategy
 * Stress
 * Toxic workplace
 * Training
 * Undermining
 * Violence
 * Wellness
 * Work–family conflict
 * Workload

See also * Corporation
 * Employment
 * Factory
 * Job
 * Office
 * Organization
 * Whistleblower

Templates * Aspects of corporations
 * Aspects of jobs
 * Aspects of occupations
 * Aspects of organizations
 * Employment

Authority control * GND: 4043774-7