This article is about the concept of region in geography. For other uses, see Region (disambiguation).In geography, regions  are areas that are broadly divided by physical characteristics (physical geography), human impact
characteristics (human geography), and the interaction of humanity and the environment (environmental geography). Geographic
regions and sub-regions are mostly described by their imprecisely defined, and sometimes transitory boundaries, except in human
geography, where jurisdiction  areas such as national borders are defined in law.

Apart from the global  continental  regions, there are also hydrospheric  and atmospheric  regions that cover the oceans, and
discrete climates  above the land and water masses of the planet. The land and water global regions are divided into subregions
geographically bounded by large geological features that influence large-scale ecologies, such as plains  and features.

As a way of describing spatial areas, the concept of regions is important and widely used among the many branches of geography,
each of which can describe areas in regional terms. For example, ecoregion is a term used in environmental geography, cultural
region in cultural geography, bioregion in biogeography, and so on. The field of geography that studies regions themselves is
called regional geography.

In the fields of physical geography, ecology, biogeography, zoogeography, and environmental geography, regions tend to be based on
natural features such as ecosystems  or biotopes, biomes, drainage basins, natural regions, mountain ranges, soil types. Where 
human geography  is concerned, the regions and subregions are described by the discipline of ethnography.

A region has its own nature that could not be moved. The first nature is its natural environment (landform, climate, etc.). The
second nature is its physical elements complex that were built by people in the past. The third nature is its socio-cultural
context that could not be replaced by new immigrants.[citation needed]



GLOBALIZATION
Global regions distinguishable from space, and are therefore clearly distinguished by the two basic terrestrial environments, land
and water. However, they have been generally recognised as such much earlier by terrestrial cartography  because of their impact
on human geography. They are divided into largest of land regions, known as continents, and the largest of water regions known as 
oceans. There are also significant regions that do not belong to either classification, such as archipelago  regions that are 
littoral  regions, or earthquake  regions that are defined in geology.

CONTINENTAL REGIONS
Continental regions are usually based on broad experiences in human history and attempts to reduce very large areas to more
manageable regionalization  for the purpose of study. As such they are conceptual constructs, usually lacking distinct boundaries.
Oceanic division into maritime regions are used in conjunction with the relationship to the central area of the continent, using
directions of the compass.

Some continental regions are defined by the major continental feature of their identity, such as the Amazon basin, or the Sahara,
which both occupy a significant percentage of their respective continental land area.

To a large extent, major continental regions are mental constructs created by considering an efficient way to define large areas
of the continents. For the most part, the images of the world are derived as much from academic study s the media[clarification
needed]  or from personal experience of global exploration. They are a matter of collective human knowledge of its own planet and
are attempts to better understand their environments.

REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY
Regional geography  is a branch of geography that studies regions of all sizes across the Earth. It has a prevailing descriptive
character. The main aim is to understand or define the uniqueness or character of a particular region, which consists of natural
as well as human elements. Attention is paid also to regionalization, which covers the proper techniques of space delimitation 
into regions.

Regional geography is also considered as a certain approach to study in geographical sciences (similar to quantitative  or 
critical geographies; for more information, see history of geography).

HUMAN GEOGRAPHY
Human geography  is a branch of geography that focuses on the study of patterns and processes that shape human interaction with
various discrete environments. It encompasses human, political, cultural, social, and economic  aspects among others that are
often clearly delineated. While the major focus of human geography is not the physical landscape of the Earth (see physical
geography), it is hardly possible to discuss human geography without referring to the physical landscape on which human activities
are being played out, and environmental geography  is emerging as a link between the two. Regions of human geography can be
divided into many broad categories:

 * Cultural geography
 * Demography
 * Development geography
 * Economic geography
 * Ethnography
 * Geopolitics
 * Health geography
 * Historical geography
 * Language geography
 * Religion geography
 * Social geography
 * Time geography
 * Tourism geography
 * Transportation geography
 * Urban geography

HISTORICAL REGIONS
The field of historical geography  involves the study of human history as it relates to places and regions  or the study of how
places and regions have changed over time.

D. W. Meinig, a historical geographer of America, describes many historical regions in his book The Shaping of America: A
Geographical Perspective on 500 Years of History. For example, in identifying European "source regions" in early American
colonization efforts, he defines and describes the Northwest European Atlantic Protestant Region, which includes sub-regions such
as the "Western Channel Community", which itself is made of sub-regions such as the English West Country  of Cornwall, Devon, 
Somerset, and Dorset.

In describing historic regions of America, Meinig writes of "The Great Fishery" off the coast of Newfoundland and New England, an
oceanic region that includes the Grand Banks. He rejects regions traditionally used in describing American history, like New
France, "West Indies", the Middle Colonies, and the individual colonies themselves (Province of Maryland, for example). Instead he
writes of "discrete colonization areas," which may be named after colonies but rarely adhere strictly to political boundaries.
Historic regions of this type Meinig writes about include "Greater New England" and its major sub-regions of "Plymouth," "New
Haven shores" (including parts of Long Island), "Rhode Island" (or "Narragansett Bay"), "the Piscataqua," "Massachusetts Bay,"
"Connecticut Valley," and to a lesser degree, regions in the sphere of influence of Greater New England, "Acadia" (Nova Scotia),
"Newfoundland and The Fishery/The Banks."

Other examples of historical regions include Iroquoia, Ohio Country, Illinois Country, and Rupert's Land.

TOURISM REGION
Main article: Tourism regionA tourism region is a geographical region that has been designated by a governmental organization or tourism bureau  as having
common cultural or environmental characteristics. These regions are often named after a geographical, former, or current
administrative region or may have a name created for tourism  purposes. The names often evoke certain positive qualities of the
area and suggest a coherent tourism experience to visitors. Countries, states, provinces, and other administrative regions are
often carved up into tourism regions to facilitate attracting visitors.

Some of the more famous tourism regions based on historical or current administrative regions include Tuscany[1]  in Italy and 
Yucatán[2]  in Mexico. Famous examples of regions created by a government or tourism bureau include the United Kingdom's Lake
District[3]  and California's Wine Country.[4]  great plains region

NATURAL RESOURCE REGIONS
Natural resources  often occur in distinct regions. Natural resource regions can be a topic of physical geography or environmental
geography, but also have a strong element of human geography and economic geography. A coal region, for example, is a physical or
geomorphological region, but its development and exploitation can make it into an economic and a cultural region. Some examples of
natural resource regions include the Rumaila Field, the oil field that lies along the border or Iraq and Kuwait and played a role
in the Gulf War; the Coal Region  of Pennsylvania, which is a historical region as well as a cultural, physical, and natural
resource region; the South Wales Coalfield, which like Pennsylvania's coal region is a historical, cultural, and natural region;
the Kuznetsk Basin, a similarly important coal mining region in Russia; Kryvbas, the economic and iron ore mining region of
Ukraine; and the James Bay Project, a large region of Quebec where one of the largest hydroelectric systems in the world has been
developed.

RELIGIOUS REGIONS
Sometimes a region associated with a religion is given a name, like Christendom, a term with medieval and renaissance connotations
of Christianity as a sort of social and political polity. The term Muslim world  is sometimes used to refer to the region of the
world where Islam is dominant. These broad terms are very vague when used to describe regions.

Within some religions there are clearly defined regions. The Roman Catholic Church, the Church of England, the Eastern Orthodox
Church, and others, define ecclesiastical regions with names such as diocese, eparchy, ecclesiastical provinces, and parish.

For example, the United States is divided into 32 Roman Catholic ecclesiastical provinces. The Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod  is
organized into 33 geographic districts, which are subdivided into circuits  (the Atlantic District (LCMS), for example). The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints  uses regions similar to dioceses and parishes, but uses terms like ward  and stake.



POLITICAL REGIONS
In the field of political geography  regions tend to be based on political units such as sovereign states; subnational units such
as provinces, counties, townships, territories, etc.; and multinational groupings, including formally defined units such as the 
European Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and NATO, as well as informally defined regions such as the Third
World, Western Europe, and the Middle East.

ADMINISTRATIVE REGIONS
The word "region" is taken from the Latin  regio  (derived from regere, to rule), and a number of countries have borrowed the term
as the formal name for a type of subnational entity  (e.g., the región, used in Chile). In English, the word is also used as the
conventional translation for equivalent terms in other languages (e.g., the область  (oblast), used in Russia alongside a broader
term регион).

The following countries use the term "region" (or its cognate) as the name of a type of subnational administrative unit:

 * Belgium  (in French, région; in German, Region; the Dutch  term gewest  is often translated as "region")
 * Chad  (région, effective from 2002)
 * Chile  (región)
 * Côte d'Ivoire  (région)
 * Denmark  (effective from 2007)
 * England  (not the United Kingdom as a whole)
 * Eritrea
 * France  (région)
 * Ghana
 * Guinea  (région)
 * Guinea-Bissau  (região)
 * Guyana
 * Hungary  (régió)
 * Italy  (regione)
 * Madagascar  (région)
 * Mali  (région)
 * Malta  (reġjun)
 * Namibia
 * New Zealand
 * Peru  (región)
 * Portugal  (região)
 * Philippines  (rehiyon)
 * Senegal  (région)
 * Tanzania
 * Togo  (région)
 * Trinidad and Tobago  (Regional Corporation)

The Canadian province  of Québec  also uses the "administrative region" (région administrative).

Scotland had local government regions  from 1975 to 1996.

In Spain the official name of the autonomous community  of Murcia  is Región de Murcia. Also, some single-province autonomous
communities such as Madrid  use the term región  interchangeably with comunidad autónoma.

Two län  (counties) in Sweden are officially called 'regions': Skåne  and Västra Götaland, and there is currently a controversial
proposal to divide the rest of Sweden into large regions, replacing the current counties.

The government of the Philippines  uses the term "region" (in Filipino, rehiyon) when it's necessary to group provinces, the
primary administrative subdivision of the country. This is also the case in Brazil, which groups its primary administrative
divisions (estados; "states") into grandes regiões  (greater regions) for statistical purposes, while Russia uses экономические
районы  (economic regions) in a similar way, as does Romania  and Venezuela.

The government of Singapore  makes use of the term "region" for its own administrative purposes.

The following countries use an administrative subdivision conventionally referred to as a region in English:

 * Bulgaria, which uses the област  (oblast)
 * Russia, which uses the область  (oblast'), and for some regions the край  (krai)
 * Ukraine, which uses the область  (oblast')
 * Slovakia  (kraj)

China has five 自治区 (zìzhìqū) and two 特別行政區 (or 特别行政区; tèbiéxíngzhèngqū), which are translated as "autonomous region" and "special
administrative region", respectively.

LOCAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGIONS
There are many relatively small regions based on local government agencies such as districts, agencies, or regions. In general,
they are all regions in the general sense of being bounded spatial units. Examples include electoral districts such as 
Washington's 6th congressional district  and Tennessee's 1st congressional district; school districts such as Granite School
District  and Los Angeles Unified School District; economic districts such as the Reedy Creek Improvement District; metropolitan
areas such as the Seattle metropolitan area, and metropolitan districts such as the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
Greater Chicago, the Las Vegas-Clark County Library District, the Metropolitan Police Service  of Greater London, as well as other
local districts like the York Rural Sanitary District, the Delaware River Port Authority, the Nassau County Soil and Water
Conservation District, and C-TRAN.

TRADITIONAL OR INFORMAL REGIONS
The traditional territorial divisions of some countries are also commonly rendered in English as "regions". These informal
divisions do not form the basis of the modern administrative divisions of these countries, but still define and delimit local
regional identity and sense of belonging. Examples include:

 * Finland
 * Japan
 * Korea
 * Norway  (landsdeler)
 * Romania
 * Slovakia

FUNCTIONAL REGIONS
Functional regions are usually understood to be the areas organised by the horizontal functional relations (flows, interactions)
that are maximised within a region and minimised across its borders so that the principles of internal cohesiveness and external
separation regarding spatial interactions are met (see, for instance, Farmer and Fotheringham, 2011;[5]  Klapka et al., 2013;[6] 
Smart, 1974[7]). A functional region is not an abstract spatial concept, but to a certain extent it can be regarded as a
reflection of the spatial behaviour of individuals in a geographic space. The functional region is conceived as a general concept
while its inner structure, inner spatial flows, and interactions need not necessarily show any regular pattern, only
selfcontainment. The concept of self-containment remains the only crucial defining characteristic of a functional region. Nodal
regions, functional urban regions, daily urban systems, local labour-market areas (LLMAs), or travel-to-work areas (TTWAs) are
considered to be special instances of a general functional region that need to fulfil some specific conditions regarding, for
instance, the character of the region-organising interaction or the presence of urban cores, (Halas et al., 2015[8]).

MILITARY REGIONS
See also: Military districtCommon  military ranks  in EnglishNaviesArmiesAir forcesCommissioned  and Non-commissioned  officers
Admiral of
the fleetMarshal  or
Field marshalMarshal of
the air forceAdmiralGeneralAir chief marshalVice admiralLieutenant generalAir marshalRear admiralMajor generalAir vice-marshal
CommodoreBrigadier  or
Brigadier generalAir commodoreCaptainColonelGroup captainCommanderLieutenant colonelWing commanderLieutenant
commanderMajor  or
CommandantSquadron leaderLieutenantCaptainFlight lieutenantSub-lieutenantLieutenant  or
First lieutenantFlying officerEnsignSecond lieutenantPilot officerMidshipmanOfficer cadetFlight cadetEnlisted gradesWarrant
officer  or
Chief petty officerWarrant officer  or
Sergeant majorWarrant officerPetty officerSergeantSergeantLeading seamanCorporalCorporalSeamanPrivateAircraftmanIn military usage,
a region is shorthand for the name of a military formation  larger than an Army Group  and smaller than an Army Theater  or simply
Theater. The full name of the military formation is Army Region. The size of an Army Region can vary widely but is generally
somewhere between about 1 million and 3 million soldiers. Two or more Army Regions could make up an Army Theater. An Army Region
is typically commanded by a full General  (US four stars), a Field Marshal, or General of the Army  (US five stars), or 
Generalissimo  (Soviet Union). Due to the large size of this formation, its use is rarely employed. Some of the very few examples
of an Army Region are each of the Eastern, Western, and southern (mostly in Italy) fronts in Europe during World War II. The
military map unit symbol for this echelon of formation (see Military organization  and APP-6A) consists of six Xs.

SEE ALSO
 * Autonomous region
 * Committee of the Regions
 * Continent
 * Continental fragment
 * Euroregion
 * Latin names of regions
 * Military district
 * Regional district
 * Regionalism (disambiguation)
 * Regional municipality
 * Subcontinent
 * Submerged continents
 * Subregion
 * Supercontinent
 * United Nations geoscheme

NOTES
 1. ^  Turismo.intoscana.it. Retrieved 2009-11-25
 2. ^  Visitmexico.com, Retrieved 2009-11-25
 3. ^  Lakedistrict.gov.uk, Retrieved 2009-11-25
 4. ^  Winecountry.com, Retrieved 2009-11-25
 5. ^  Farmer, CJQ; Fotheringham, AS (2011). "Network-based functional regions". Environment and Planning A. 43  (11): 2723–2741. 
    doi:10.1068/a44136.
 6. ^  Klapka, P; Halas, M; Tonev, P. "Functional regions: concept and types"  (PDF). 16th International Colloquium on Regional
    Sciences, Conference Proceedings. Brno, Masaryk University, 94–101. Retrieved 2013.  Check date values in: |access-date=  (
    help)
 7. ^  Smart, MW (1974). "Labour market areas: uses and definition". Progress in Planning. 2: 239–353. doi:
    10.1016/0305-9006(74)90008-7.
 8. ^  Halas, M; Klapka, P; Tonev, P; Bednar, M (2015). "An alternative definition and use for the constraint function for
    rule-based methods of functional regionalisation". Environment and Planning A. 47  (5): 1175–1191. doi:
    10.1177/0308518X15592306.

REFERENCES
 * Bailey, Robert G. (1996) Ecosystem Geography. New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-94586-5
 * Hampl, Martin (2000) Reality, Society and Geographical/Environmental Organization: Searching for an Integrated Order, Prague:
   Charles University, Faculty of Science. ISBN 80-902686-2-5
 * Meinig, D.W.  (1986). The Shaping of America: A Geographical Perspective on 500 Years of History, Volume 1: Atlantic America,
   1492-1800. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-03548-9

EXTERNAL LINKS
 * Map and descriptions of hydrologic unit regions of the United States
 * Federal Standards for Delineation of Hydrologic Unit Boundaries
 * Physiographic regions of the United States

 * v
 * t
 * e

Continents  of the world
Africa


Antarctica


Asia


Australia


Europe


North America


South America


Afro-Eurasia


Americas


Eurasia


Oceania

 * Former supercontinents
   Gondwana
 * Laurasia
 * Pangaea
 * Pannotia
 * Rodinia
 * Columbia
 * Kenorland
 * Nena
 * Sclavia
 * Ur
 * Vaalbara

 * Historical continents
   Amazonia
 * Arctica
 * Asiamerica
 * Atlantica
 * Avalonia
 * Baltica
 * Cimmeria
 * Congo craton
 * Euramerica
 * Kalaharia
 * Kazakhstania
 * Laurentia
 * North China
 * Siberia
 * South China
 * East Antarctica
 * India

 * Submerged continents
   Kerguelen Plateau
 * Zealandia

 * Possible future supercontinents
   Pangaea Ultima
 * Amasia
 * Novopangaea

 * Mythical and hypothesised continents
   Atlantis
 * Kumari Kandam
 * Lemuria
 * Meropis
 * Mu
 * Hyperborea
 * Terra Australis

 * See also Regions of the world
 * Continental fragment

 *   Book
 *   Category

 * v
 * t
 * e

Regions  of the worldAfrica * Mediterranean
 * Northern * Gibraltar Arc
    * Maghreb  (Barbary Coast)
    * Barbara (region)
    * Atlas Mountains
    * Sahara
    * Sahel
    * Egypt (Upper Egypt, Middle Egypt, Lower Egypt, Bashmur)
    * Nubia  (Lower Nubia)
    * Nile Valley
    * Nile Delta
    * Middle East
    * Sub-Saharan
    * Western
    * East
    * East African Rift: Great Rift Valley, Western or Albertine Rift  Valley, Eastern or Gregory Rift  Valley, Southern Rift
      Valley, Rift Valley Lakes  (Great Lakes)
    * Central
    * Mittelafrika
    * Southern
    * Horn
    * Ethiopian Highlands  (Roof of Africa)
   
   
 * Sudan (region)
 * Guinea region
 * Rhodesia (region)  (Northern Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesia)
 * Negroland
 * Mayombe
 * Igboland  (Mbaise)
 * Maputaland
 * Congo Basin
 * Chad Basin
 * Swahili coast
 * Pepper Coast
 * Gold Coast
 * Slave Coast
 * Ivory Coast
 * Tropical Africa
 * Islands
 * Madagascar
 * Anglophone Africa
 * Francophone Africa
 * Lusophone Africa
 * Arabophone Africa

North
America * Contiguous United States
 * Northern

 * Pacific Northwest
 * Northeastern United States
 * New England
 * Midwest
 * Mid-Atlantic
 * Western United States
 * Southwest
 * Llano Estacado
 * Mountain States
 * South Central United States
 * Southern United States
 * East Coast
 * West Coast
 * Gulf Coast
 * Bible Belt
 * Rust Belt
 * Appalachia
 * Great Plains
 * Great Lakes
 * Eastern Canada
 * Western Canada
 * Canadian Prairies
 * Northern Canada
 * Atlantic Canada

 * North Mexico
 * Gulf of Mexico
 * West Indies
 * Caribbean  (Greater Antilles, Lesser Antilles, Lucayan Archipelago
 * Western Caribbean Zone
 * Central
 * Isthmus of Panama
 * Mosquito Coast
 * Middle
 * Mesoamerica
 * Aridoamerica
 * Oasisamerica
 * Anglo
 * French
 * Latin (Hispanic)
 * American Cordillera
 * Ring of Fire

South
America * Southern
 * Northern (Guianan states)
 * West South America  (Andean States)
 * West Indies
 * Patagonia
 * Pampas
 * Pantanal
 * Amazon
 * Amazonia
 * Altiplano
 * Andes
 * Brazilian Highlands
 * Caribbean South America
 * Gran Chaco
 * Llanos
 * Atacama Desert
 * Cerrado
 * Latin (Hispanic)
 * American Cordillera
 * Ring of Fire

Asia * Central

 * Aral Sea
 * Aralkum Desert
 * Caspian Sea
 * Dead Sea
 * Transoxiana  (Turan)
 * Greater Khorasan
 * Ariana
 * Khwarezm
 * Sistan
 * Kazakhstania

 * Far East

 * Russian Far East

 * Extreme North
 * Eurasian Steppe
 * Pontic–Caspian steppe
 * Wild Fields
 * Yedisan
 * Muravsky Trail
 * Ural (region)
 * Volga region
 * Idel-Ural
 * Kolyma
 * Transbaikal
 * Pryazovia
 * Bjarmaland
 * Kuban
 * Zalesye
 * Ingria
 * Novorossiya
 * Gornaya Shoriya
 * Tulgas
 * Siberia
 * Eastern

 * Northeastern
 * Inner Asia
 * Manchuria

 * Outer Manchuria
 * Tibet
 * Guanzhong
 * Huizhou (region)
 * Wu (region)
 * Ordos Loop
 * Yangtze River Delta

 * Northern

 * Southern
 * Southeastern

 * Mainland  (Indochina)
 * Maritime  (Malay Archipelago)

 * East Indies  (Greater India)

 * Indian subcontinent

 * Himalayas
 * Mahabharata Range
 * Hindu Kush
 * Ganges Basin
 * Ganges Delta
 * Balochistan
 * Rajputana
 * Punjab (region)
 * Thar Desert
 * Indus Valley
 * Indus River Delta
 * Indo-Gangetic Plain
 * Eastern Coastal Plains
 * Western Coastal Plains
 * Hindi Belt
 * Doab
 * Great Rann of Kutch
 * Little Rann of Kutch
 * Deccan plateau
 * Coromandel Coast
 * Konkan
 * Lakshadweep
 * Andaman and Nicobar Islands
 * Maldive Islands
 * Western
 * Red Sea
 * Middle East  (Near East)

 * Arabian Peninsula

 * Persian Gulf

 * Pirate Coast

 * Najd
 * Hejaz
 * Tihamah
 * Eastern Arabia
 * Southern Arabia

 * Hadhramaut

 * Mediterranean Sea
 * Eastern Mediterranean
 * Zagros Mountains

 * Tigris–Euphrates river system
 * Mesopotamia  (Upper Mesopotamia, Lower Mesopotamia, Sawad)
 * Canaan
 * Aram (Biblical region)
 * Levant  (Mashriq)

 * Southern Levant
 * Levantine Sea
 * Gaza Strip
 * West Bank
 * Galilee
 * Gilead
 * Judea
 * Samaria
 * Arabah
 * Transjordan
 * Jordan Rift Valley
 * Sinai Peninsula
 * Caucasus

 * Transcaucasia

 * Arabian Desert

 * Syrian Desert
 * Fertile Crescent
 * Syria (region)  (Greater Syria)
 * Palestine (region)
 * Anatolia  (Asia Minor)
 * Cilicia
 * Cappadocia

 * Asia-Pacific
 * Tropical Asia
 * Ring of Fire

Europe * Central
 * Mitteleuropa
 * Danubian countries
 * Prussia (region)
 * Lithuania Minor
 * Northern * Nordic
    * Northwestern
    * Scandinavia
    * Scandinavian Peninsula
    * Fennoscandian Peninsula
    * Sápmi
    * Eastern
    * Baltic
    * Crimea
    * Donbass
    * Sloboda Ukraine
    * Southeastern
    * Balkans  (Balkan Peninsula)
    * North Caucasus
    * Kabardia
    * Southern Russia
    * European Russia
    * Middle East
   
   
 * Southern * Italian Peninsula
    * Insular Italy
    * Iberia
    * Gibraltar Arc
    * Southeastern
    * Mediterranean
   
   
 * Western
 * Alpine countries
 * Benelux * Low Countries
   
   
 * Northwestern
 * British Isles
 * Channel Islands
 * Germanic
 * Romance
 * Celtic
 * Slavic countries
 * Eurasian Steppe
 * Pontic–Caspian steppe
 * Wild Fields
 * Pannonian Basin
 * Volhynia
 * Karelia  (East Karelia, Karelia (historical province of Finland))

Oceania * Australasia

 * Australia

 * Capital Country
 * Eastern Australia/East Coast of Australia  (Eastern Seaboard)
 * Lake Eyre basin
 * Murray–Darling basin
 * Northern Australia
 * Nullarbor Plain
 * Outback
 * Southern Australia
 * Sunraysia
 * Great Victoria Desert

 * New Guinea
 * Zealandia

 * Pacific Islands

 * Micronesia
 * Melanesia
 * Polynesia

Polar * Antarctic
 * Arctic

Oceans * World (Sea)
 * Arctic
 * Atlantic
 * Indian
 * Pacific

 * Great Barrier Reef
 * Mariana Trench
 * Ring of Fire

 * Southern

 * Convergence

 * List of seas

 *   Continents of the world / List of seas / Physical Earth

 * v
 * t
 * e

Designations for types of administrative territorial entitiesEnglish termsCommon English terms1Area * Insular area
 * Local government area
 * Protected area
 * Special area
 * Statistical area * Combined statistical area
    * Metropolitan statistical area
    * Micropolitan statistical area
   
   
 * Urban area

Election * Constituency
 * district
 * Precinct
 * Riding
 * Ward

City * Autonomous city
 * Charter city
 * Independent city
 * Imperial city
 * Free imperial city
 * Royal free city
 * Capital * Federal capital
   
   

County * Administrative county
 * Autonomous county
 * Consolidated city-county
 * Metropolitan county * Non-metropolitan
   
   
 * Viscountcy

District * Capital district
 * City district
 * Federal district
 * Indian government district
 * Land district
 * Metropolitan district * Non-metropolitan district
   
   
 * Military district
 * Municipal district
 * Police district
 * Regional district
 * Rural district
 * Sanitary district
 * Subdistrict
 * Urban district

Municipality * Direct-controlled municipality
 * District municipality
 * Mountain resort municipality
 * Neutral municipality
 * Regional municipality * County
   
   
 * Resort municipality
 * Rural municipality
 * Specialized municipality

Prefecture * Autonomous prefecture
 * Subprefecture
 * Super-prefecture
 * Praetorian prefecture

Province * Autonomous province
 * Overseas province
 * Roman province

Region * Administrative region
 * Autonomous region
 * Capital region
 * Development region
 * Mesoregion
 * Microregion
 * Overseas region
 * Special administrative region
 * Subregion

Reserve * Biosphere reserve
 * Game reserve
 * Indian reserve
 * Nature reserve

State * Federal state
 * Free state
 * Sovereign state

Territory * Capital territory * Federal capital territory
   
   
 * Dependent territory
 * Federal territory
 * Organized incorporated territory
 * Overseas territory
 * Union territory
 * Unorganized territory

major groups * Canton * Half-canton
   
   
 * Borough * County
    * Metropolitan
   
   
 * Community * Autonomous
    * Residential
   
   
 * Country * Constituent
    * Overseas
   
   
 * Department * Overseas department
   
   
 * Town * Census
    * Market
   
   

Township * Charter township
 * Civil township
 * Paper township
 * Survey township
 * Urban township

Unit * Autonomous territorial unit
 * Local administrative unit
 * Municipal unit

Zone * Economic zone * Exclusive economic zone
    * Free economic zone
    * Special economic zone
   
   
 * Free trade zone
 * Neutral zone
 * Self-administered zone
 * Time zone

Other English termsCurrent * Alpine resort
 * Bailiwick
 * Banner * Autonomous
   
   
 * Block
 * Cadastre
 * Circle
 * Circuit
 * Colony
 * Commune
 * Condominium
 * Division * Police division
    * Subdivision
   
   
 * Duchy
 * Eldership
 * Federal dependency
 * Governorate
 * Hamlet
 * Indian reservation
 * Manor * Royal
   
   
 * Neighbourhood
 * Parish
 * Principality
 * Protectorate
 * Quarter
 * Regency
 * Autonomous republic
 * Sector * Autonomous
   
   
 * Shire
 * Suzerainty
 * Townland
 * Village * Administrative
    * Summer
   
   
 * 

Historical * Agency
 * Barony
 * Burgh
 * Exarchate
 * Hide
 * Hundred
 * Imperial Circle
 * March
 * Monthon
 * Presidency
 * Residency
 * Roman diocese
 * Seat
 * Tenth
 * Tithing

Non-English or loanwordsCurrent * Amt
 * Bakhsh
 * Barangay
 * Bezirk
 * Regierungsbezirk
 * Comune
 * Frazione
 * Fu
 * Gemeinde
 * Județ
 * Kunta / kommun * Finland
    * Sweden
   
   
 * Län
 * Località
 * Megye
 * Muban
 * Oblast * Autonomous
   
   
 * Okrug
 * Ostān
 * Poblacion
 * Purok
 * Shahrestān
 * Sum
 * Sýsla
 * Tehsil
 * Vingtaine

Historical * Commote
 * Gau
 * Heerlijkheid
 * Köping
 * Maalaiskunta
 * Nome * Egypt
    * Greece
   
   
 * Pagus
 * Pargana
 * Plasă
 * Satrapy
 * Subah
 * Syssel
 * Zhou

 * v
 * t
 * e

Arabic  terms for country subdivisionsFirst-level * Muhafazah (محافظة  governorate)
 * Wilayah (ولاية  province)
 * Mintaqah (منطقة  region)
 * Mudiriyah (مديرية  directorate)
 * Imarah (إمارة  emirate)
 * Baladiyah (بلدية  municipality)
 * Shabiyah (شعبية  "popularate")

Second / third-level * Mintaqah (منطقة  region)
 * Qadaa (قضاء  district)
 * Nahiyah (ناحية  subdistrict)
 * Markaz (مركز  district)
 * Mutamadiyah (معتمدية  "delegation")
 * Daerah/Daïra (دائرة  circle)
 * Liwa (لواء  banner / sanjak)

City / township-level * Amanah (أمانة  municipality)
 * Baladiyah (بلدية  municipality)
 * Ḥai (حي  neighborhood / quarter)
 * Mahallah (محلة)
 * Qarya (قرية)
 * Sheyakhah (شياخة  "neighborhood subdivision")

English translations given are those most commonly used. * v
 * t
 * e

French  terms for country subdivisions * arrondissement
 * département
 * préfecture
 * subprefectures

 * v
 * t
 * e

Greek  terms for country subdivisionsModern * apokentromenes dioikiseis  / geniki dioikisis§  / diamerisma§  / periphereia
 * nomos§  / periphereiaki enotita
 * demos  / eparchia§  / koinotita§

Historical * archontia/archontaton
 * bandon
 * demos
 * despotaton
 * dioikesis
 * doukaton
 * droungos
 * eparchia
 * exarchaton
 * katepanikion
 * kephalatikion
 * kleisoura
 * meris
 * naukrareia
 * satrapeia
 * strategis
 * thema
 * toparchia
 * tourma

§  signifies a defunct institution * v
 * t
 * e

Portuguese  terms for country subdivisionsRegional subdivisions * Estado
 * Distrito federal
 * Província
 * Região
 * Distrito
 * Comarca
 * Capitania

Local subdivisions * Município
 * Concelho
 * Freguesia
 * Comuna
 * Circunscrição

Setlements * Cidade
 * Vila
 * Aldeia
 * Bairro
 * Lugar

 * Historical subdivisions in italics.

 * v
 * t
 * e

Slavic  terms for country subdivisionsCurrent * dzielnica
 * gmina
 * krai
 * kraj
 * krajina / pokrajina
 * městys
 * obec
 * oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
 * okręg
 * okres
 * okrug
 * opština / općina / občina / obshtina
 * osiedle
 * powiat / povit
 * raion
 * selsoviet / silrada
 * sołectwo
 * voivodeship / vojvodina
 * županija

Historical * darugha
 * gromada
 * guberniya / gubernia
 * jurydyka
 * khutor
 * obshchina
 * okolia
 * opole
 * pogost
 * prowincja
 * sorok
 * starostwo / starostva
 * uyezd
 * volost
 * ziemia
 * župa

 * v
 * t
 * e

Spanish  terms for country subdivisionsNational, Federal * Comunidad autónoma
 * Departamento
 * Distrito federal
 * Estado
 * Provincia
 * Región

Regional, Metropolitan * Cantón
 * Comarca
 * Comuna
 * Corregimiento
 * Delegación
 * Distrito
 * Mancomunidad
 * Merindad
 * Municipalidad
 * Municipio
 * Parroquia * Ecuador
    * Spain
   
   

Urban, Rural * Aldea
 * Alquería
 * Anteiglesia
 * Asentamiento * Asentamiento informal
    * Pueblos jóvenes
   
   
 * Barrio
 * Campamento
 * Caserío
 * Ciudad * Ciudad autónoma
   
   
 * Colonia
 * Lugar
 * Masía
 * Población
 * Ranchería
 * Sitio
 * Vereda
 * Villa
 * Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)

 * Historical subdivisions in italics.

 * v
 * t
 * e

Turkish  terms for country subdivisionsModern * il  (province)
 * ilçe  (district)
 * şehir  (city)
 * kasaba  (town)
 * belediye  (municipality)
 * belde  (community)
 * köy  (village)
 * mahalle  (neighbourhood/quarter)

Historical * ağalık  (feudal district)
 * bucak  (subdistrict)
 * beylerbeylik  (province)
 * kadılık  (subprovince)
 * kaza  (sub-province)
 * hidivlik  (viceroyalty)
 * mutasarrıflık  (subprovince)
 * nahiye  (nahiyah)
 * paşalık  (province)
 * reya  (Romanian principalities)
 * sancak  (prefecture)
 * vilayet  (province)
 * voyvodalık  (Romanian provinces)

1  Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.See also: Census division, Electoral
district, Political division, and Table of administrative divisions by countryAuthority control * GND: 4049029-4