This article is about the form of government. For the political ideology, see Republicanism. For other uses, see Republic
(disambiguation).Part of the Politics seriesBasic forms of governmentPower structureSeparation * Associated state
 * Dominion
 * Chiefdom

Federalism * Federation
 * Confederation
 * Devolution

Integration * Empire
 * Hegemony
 * Unitary state

Administrative divisionPower sourceDemocracy
power of many * Direct
 * Representative
 * Semi
 * others

Oligarchy
power of few * Aristocracy
 * Military junta
 * Plutocracy
 * Stratocracy
 * Timocracy
 * Theocracy
 * Kritarchy
 * Particracy

Autocracy
power of one * Despotism
 * Illiberal democracy
 * Semi-authoritarian
 * Dictatorship

Hybrids * Anocracy

Power ideologyMonarchy  vs. Republic
socio-political ideologies * Absolute
 * Constitutional
   
 * Directorial
 * Legalist
   
 * Parliamentary
 * Semi-presidential
 * Presidential

Authoritarian  vs. Libertarian
socio-economic ideologies * Capitalism
 * Colonialism
 * Communism
 * Distributism
 * Feudalism
 * Socialism

Anarchism  vs. Statism
civil-liberties ideologies * Anarchy
 * Minarchy
 * Totalitarianism

Global  vs. Local
geo-cultural ideologies * Central
 * City-state
 * National unity
 * World

Politics portal * v
 * t
 * e

A republic  (from Latin: res publica) is a sovereign state  or country[1]  which is organized with a form of government  in which
power resides in elected individuals representing the citizen body[2][3]  and government leaders exercise power according to the 
rule of law. In modern times, the definition of a republic is commonly referred to a government which excludes a monarch.[3][4] 
Currently, 147 of the world's 206 sovereign states  use the word "republic" as part of their official names; not all of these are
republics in the sense of having elected governments, nor do all nations with elected governments use the word "republic" in their
names.

Both modern and ancient republics vary widely in their ideology and composition. In the classical and medieval  period of Europe,
many states were fashioned on the Roman Republic, which referred to the governance of the city of Rome, between it having kings
and emperors. The Italian medieval and Renaissance  political tradition, today referred to as "civic humanism", is sometimes
considered to derive directly from Roman republicans such as Sallust  and Tacitus. However, Greek-influenced Roman authors, such
as Polybius[5]  and Cicero, sometimes also used the term as a translation for the Greek politeia  which could mean regime
generally, but could also be applied to certain specific types of regime which did not exactly correspond to that of the Roman
Republic. Republics were not equated with classical democracies such as Athens, but had a democratic aspect.

Republics became more common in the Western world starting in the late 18th century, eventually displacing absolute monarchy  as
the most common form of government in Europe. In modern republics the executive is legitimized both by a constitution  and by
popular suffrage. In his work, "The Spirit of the Laws", Montesquieu  classified both democracies, where all the people have a
share in rule, and aristocracies, where only some of the people rule, as republican forms of government.[6]

Most often a republic is a single sovereign state, but there are also sub-sovereign state entities that are referred to as
republics, or which have governments that are described as 'republican' in nature. For instance, Article IV  of the United States
Constitution  "guarantee[s] to every State in this Union a Republican form of Government".[7]  In contrast, the Soviet Union  was 
constitutionally  described as a "federal multinational state", composed of 15 republics, two of which – Ukraine  and Belarus  –
had their own seats at the United Nations.



ETYMOLOGY
The term originates as the Latin translation of Greek  word politeia. Cicero, among other Latin writers, translated politeia  as 
res publica  and it was in turn translated by Renaissance scholars as republic  (or similar terms in various western European
languages).[citation needed]

The term politeia  can be translated as form of government, polity, or regime, and is therefore not always a word for a specific
type of regime as the modern word republic is. (One of Plato's major works on political science was titled Politeia  and in
English it is thus known as The Republic. However, apart from the title, in modern translations of The Republic, alternative
translations of politeia  are also used.[8]) However, in Book III of his Politics  (1279a), Aristotle was apparently the first
classical writer to state that the term politeia  can be used to refer more specifically to one type of politeia: "When the
citizens at large govern for the public good, it is called by the name common to all governments (to koinon onoma pasōn tōn
politeiōn), government (politeia)". And also amongst classical Latin, the term "republic" can be used in a general way to refer to
any regime, or in a specific way to refer to governments which work for the public good.

In medieval Northern Italy, a number of city states had commune  or signoria  based governments. In the late Middle Ages, writers,
such as Giovanni Villani, began writing about the nature of these states and the differences from other types of regime. They used
terms such as libertas populi, a free people, to describe the states. The terminology changed in the 15th century as the renewed
interest in the writings of Ancient Rome  caused writers to prefer using classical terminology. To describe non-monarchical states
writers, most importantly Leonardo Bruni, adopted the Latin phrase res publica.[9]

While Bruni and Machiavelli  used the term to describe the states of Northern Italy, which were not monarchies, the term res
publica  has a set of interrelated meanings in the original Latin. The term can quite literally be translated as "public matter".
[10]  It was most often used by Roman writers to refer to the state and government, even during the period of the Roman Empire.
[11]

In subsequent centuries, the English word commonwealth  came to be used as a translation of res publica, and its use in English
was comparable to how the Romans used the term res publica.[12]  Notably, during The Protectorate  of Oliver Cromwell  the word 
commonwealth  was the most common term to call the new monarchless state, but the word republic  was also in common use.[13]

Presently, the term "republic" commonly means a system of government which derives its power from the people rather than from
another basis, such as heredity  or divine right.[citation needed]

HISTORY
While the philosophical terminology developed in classical Greece and Rome, as already noted by Aristotle there was already a long
history of city states with a wide variety of constitutions, not only in Greece but also in the Middle East. After the classical
period, during the Middle Ages, many free cities developed again, such as Venice.

CLASSICAL REPUBLICS
Main article: Classical republic
A map of the Roman RepublicThe modern type of "republic" itself is different from any type of state found in the classical world.[14][15]  Nevertheless,
there are a number of states of the classical era  that are today still called republics. This includes ancient Athens, Sparta 
and the Roman Republic. While the structure and governance of these states was very different from that of any modern republic,
there is debate about the extent to which classical, medieval, and modern republics form a historical continuum. J. G. A. Pocock 
has argued that a distinct republican tradition stretches from the classical world to the present.[10][16]  Other scholars
disagree.[10]  Paul Rahe, for instance, argues that the classical republics had a form of government with few links to those in
any modern country.[17]

The political philosophy of the classical republics have in any case had an influence on republican thought throughout the
subsequent centuries. Philosophers and politicians advocating for republics, such as Machiavelli, Montesquieu, Adams, and Madison,
relied heavily on classical Greek and Roman sources which described various types of regimes.

Aristotle's Politics  discusses various forms of government. One form Aristotle named politeia, which consisted of a mixture of
the other forms. He argued that this was one of the ideal forms of government. Polybius  expanded on many of these ideas, again
focusing on the idea of mixed government. The most important Roman work in this tradition is Cicero's De re publica.

Over time, the classical republics were either conquered by empires or became ones themselves. Most of the Greek republics were
annexed to the Macedonian Empire  of Alexander. The Roman Republic expanded dramatically conquering the other states of the
Mediterranean that could be considered republics, such as Carthage. The Roman Republic itself then became the Roman Empire.

OTHER ANCIENT REPUBLICS
Vaishali  was the capital  of the Vajjian Confederacy, an early republic.The term "republic" is not commonly used to refer to
pre-classical city states, especially if outside Europe and the area which was under Graeco-Roman influence.[10]  However some
early states outside Europe had governments that are sometimes today considered similar to republics.

In the ancient Near East, a number of cities of the Eastern Mediterranean  achieved collective rule. Arwad  has been cited as one
of the earliest known examples of a republic, in which the people, rather than a monarch, are described as sovereign.[18]  The 
Israelite  confederation of the era before the United Monarchy  has also been considered a type of republic.[10][19]  In Africa
the Axum Empire  was organized as a confederation ruled similarly to a royal republic.[20]  Similarly the Igbo  nation of what is
now Nigeria.[21]

The ancient Indian subcontinent  had a number of early republics known as Mahajanapadas.[22]  Mahajanapadas consisted of sixteen
oligarchic republics that existed during the sixth centuries BCE to fourth centuries BCE.[23][24]  Some Indian scholars, such as 
K.P. Jayaswal, have argued that a number of states in ancient India  had republican forms of government.[25][26][27]  There are no
surviving constitutions  or works of political philosophy  from this period in Indian history, but surviving religious texts  do
refer to a number of states having Gaṇa sangha, or council-based, as opposed to monarchical, governments.

ICELANDIC COMMONWEALTH
The Icelandic Commonwealth was established in 930 AD by refugees from Norway  who had fled the unification of that country under
King Harald Fairhair. The Commonwealth consisted of a number of clans run by chieftains, and the Althing  was a combination of
parliament and supreme court where disputes appealed from lower courts were settled, laws were decided, and decisions of national
importance were taken. One such example was the Christianisation of Iceland  in 1000, where the Althing decreed, in order to
prevent an invasion, that all Icelanders must be baptized, and forbade celebration of pagan rituals. Contrary to most states, the
Icelandic Commonwealth had no official leader.

In the early 13th century, the Age of the Sturlungs, the Commonwealth began to suffer from long conflicts between warring clans.
This, combined with pressure from the Norwegian king Haakon IV  for the Icelanders to re-join the Norwegian "family", led the
Icelandic chieftains to accept Haakon IV as king by the signing of the Gamli sáttmáli  ("Old Covenant") in 1262. This effectively
brought the Commonwealth to an end. The Althing, however, is still Iceland's parliament, almost 800 years later.[28]

MERCANTILE REPUBLICS
Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, Neptune  offers the wealth of the sea to Venice, 1748–50. This painting is an allegory of the power of
the Republic of Venice.In Europe new republics appeared in the late Middle Ages when a number of small states embraced republican
systems of government. These were generally small, but wealthy, trading states, like the Italian city-states  and the Hanseatic
League, in which the merchant class had risen to prominence. Knud Haakonssen has noted that, by the Renaissance, Europe was
divided with those states controlled by a landed elite being monarchies and those controlled by a commercial elite being
republics.[12]

Across Europe a wealthy merchant class developed in the important trading cities. Despite their wealth they had little power in
the feudal system  dominated by the rural land owners, and across Europe began to advocate for their own privileges and powers.
The more centralized states, such as France and England, granted limited city charters.

Beginning of the Republic of Metz. Election of the first Head-Alderman  in 1289, by Auguste Migette. Metz  was then a free
imperial city  of the Holy Roman Emperor.In the more loosely governed Holy Roman Empire, 51 of the largest towns became free imperial cities. While still under the
dominion of the Holy Roman Emperor  most power was held locally and many adopted republican forms of government.[29]  The same
rights to imperial immediacy were secured by the major trading cities of Switzerland. The towns and villages of alpine Switzerland 
 had, courtesy of geography, also been largely excluded from central control. Unlike Italy and Germany, much of the rural area was
thus not controlled by feudal barons, but by independent farmers who also used communal forms of government. When the Habsburgs 
tried to reassert control over the region both rural farmers and town merchants joined the rebellion. The Swiss  were victorious,
and the Swiss Confederacy  was proclaimed, and Switzerland has retained a republican form of government to the present.[19]

Italy was the most densely populated area of Europe, and also one with the weakest central government. Many of the towns thus
gained considerable independence and adopted commune forms of government. Completely free of feudal control, the Italian
city-states expanded, gaining control of the rural hinterland.[29]  The two most powerful were the Republic of Venice  and its
rival the Republic of Genoa. Each were large trading ports, and further expanded by using naval power to control large parts of
the Mediterranean. It was in Italy that an ideology advocating for republics first developed. Writers such as Bartholomew of Lucca
, Brunetto Latini, Marsilius of Padua, and Leonardo Bruni saw the medieval city-states as heirs to the legacy of Greece and Rome.

Two Russian cities with powerful merchant class—Novgorod  and Pskov—also adopted republican forms of government in 12th and 13th
centuries, respectively, which ended when the republics were conquered by Muscovy/Russia  at the end 15th – beginning of 16th
century.[30]

The dominant form of government for these early republics was control by a limited council of elite patricians. In those areas
that held elections, property qualifications or guild membership limited both who could vote and who could run. In many states no
direct elections were held and council members were hereditary or appointed by the existing council. This left the great majority
of the population without political power, and riots and revolts by the lower classes were common. The late Middle Ages saw more
than 200 such risings in the towns of the Holy Roman Empire.[31]  Similar revolts occurred in Italy, notably the Ciompi Revolt  in
Florence.

MERCANTILE REPUBLICS OUTSIDE OF EUROPE
Following the collapse of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum  and establishment of the Turkish  Anatolian Beyliks, the Ahiler  merchant
fraternities established a state centered on Ankara  that is sometimes compared to the Italian mercantile republics.

CALVINIST REPUBLICS
See also: European wars of religionWhile the classical writers had been the primary ideological source for the republics of Italy,
in Northern Europe, the Protestant Reformation  would be used as justification for establishing new republics.[32]  Most important
was Calvinist  theology, which developed in the Swiss Confederacy, one of the largest and most powerful of the medieval republics.
 John Calvin  did not call for the abolition of monarchy, but he advanced the doctrine that the faithful had the duty to overthrow
irreligious monarchs.[33]  Advocacy for republics appeared in the writings of the Huguenots  during the French Wars of Religion.
[34]

Calvinism played an important role in the republican revolts in England and the Netherlands. Like the city-states of Italy and the
Hanseatic League, both were important trading centres, with a large merchant class prospering from the trade with the New World.
Large parts of the population of both areas also embraced Calvinism. During the Dutch Revolt  (beginning in 1566), the Dutch
Republic  emerged from rejection of Spanish Habsburg  rule. However, the country did not adopt the republican form of government
immediately: in the formal declaration of independence (Act of Abjuration, 1581), the throne of king Philip  was only declared
vacant, and the Dutch magistrates asked the Duke of Anjou, queen Elizabeth of England  and prince William of Orange, one after
another, to replace Philip. It took until 1588 before the Estates  (the Staten, the representative assembly at the time) decided
to vest the sovereignty of the country in themselves.

In 1641 the English Civil War  began. Spearheaded by the Puritans  and funded by the merchants of London, the revolt was a
success, and King Charles I  was executed. In England James Harrington, Algernon Sidney, and John Milton  became some of the first
writers to argue for rejecting monarchy and embracing a republican form of government. The English Commonwealth  was short lived,
and the monarchy soon restored. The Dutch Republic continued in name until 1795, but by the mid-18th century the stadtholder  had
become a de facto  monarch. Calvinists were also some of the earliest settlers of the British and Dutch colonies of North America.

LIBERAL REPUBLICS
Liberal republics in early modern EuropeAn allegory of the Republic in Paris.Septinsular Republic  flag from the early 1800s.A
revolutionary Republican hand-written bill from the Stockholm riots during the Revolutions of 1848, reading: "Dethrone Oscar  he
is not fit to be a king: Long live the Republic! The Reform! down with the Royal house, long live Aftonbladet! death to the king /
Republic Republic the People. Brunkeberg  this evening". The writer's identity is unknown.Along with these initial republican
revolts, early modern Europe  also saw a great increase in monarchial power. The era of absolute monarchy  replaced the limited
and decentralized monarchies that had existed in most of the Middle Ages. It also saw a reaction against the total control of the
monarch as a series of writers created the ideology known as liberalism.

Most of these Enlightenment  thinkers were far more interested in ideas of constitutional monarchy  than in republics. The
Cromwell regime had discredited republicanism, and most thinkers felt that republics ended in either anarchy  or tyranny.[35] 
Thus philosophers like Voltaire  opposed absolutism while at the same time being strongly pro-monarchy.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau  and Montesquieu  praised republics, and looked on the city-states of Greece as a model. However, both also
felt that a nation-state like France, with 20 million people, would be impossible to govern as a republic. Rousseau admired the
republican experiment in Corsica  (1755-1769) and described his ideal political structure of small self-governing communes.
Montesquieu felt that a city-state should ideally be a republic, but maintained that a limited monarchy was better suited to a
large nation.

The American Revolution  began as a rejection only of the authority of the British Parliament  over the colonies, not of the
monarchy. The failure of the British monarch to protect the colonies from what they considered the infringement of their rights
to
representative government, the monarch's branding of those requesting redress as traitors, and his support for sending combat
troops to demonstrate authority resulted in widespread perception of the British monarchy as tyrannical. With the United States
Declaration of Independence  the leaders of the revolt firmly rejected the monarchy and embraced republicanism. The leaders of the
revolution were well versed in the writings of the French liberal thinkers, and also in history of the classical republics. John
Adams had notably written a book on republics throughout history. In addition, the widely distributed and popularly read-aloud
tract Common Sense, by Thomas Paine, succinctly and eloquently laid out the case for republican ideals and independence to the
larger public. The Constitution of the United States, ratified in 1789, created a relatively strong federal republic  to replace
the relatively weak confederation  under the first attempt at a national government with the Articles of Confederation and
Perpetual Union  ratified in 1783. The first ten amendments to the Constitution, called the United States Bill of Rights,
guaranteed certain natural rights  fundamental to republican ideals that justified the Revolution.

The French Revolution  was also not republican at its outset. Only after the Flight to Varennes  removed most of the remaining
sympathy for the king was a republic declared and Louis XVI  sent to the guillotine. The stunning success of France in the French
Revolutionary Wars  saw republics spread by force of arms across much of Europe as a series of client republics  were set up
across the continent. The rise of Napoleon  saw the end of the French First Republic  and her Sister Republics, each replaced by '

popular monarchies'. Throughout the Napoleonic period, the victors extinguished many of the oldest republics on the continent,
including the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa, and the Dutch Republic. They were eventually transformed into monarchies
or absorbed into neighbouring monarchies.

Outside Europe another group of republics was created as the Napoleonic Wars  allowed the states of Latin America to gain their
independence. Liberal ideology had only a limited impact on these new republics. The main impetus was the local European descended
 Creole  population in conflict with the Peninsulares  - governors sent from overseas. The majority of the population in most of
Latin America was of either African or Amerindian  descent, and the Creole elite had little interest in giving these groups power
and broad-based popular sovereignty. Simón Bolívar, both the main instigator of the revolts and one of its most important
theorists, was sympathetic to liberal ideals but felt that Latin America lacked the social cohesion for such a system to function
and advocated autocracy as necessary.

In Mexico this autocracy  briefly took the form of a monarchy in the First Mexican Empire. Due to the Peninsular War, the
Portuguese court was relocated to Brazil in 1808. Brazil gained independence  as a monarchy on September 7, 1822, and the Empire
of Brazil  lasted until 1889. In the other states various forms of autocratic republic existed until most were liberalized at the
end of the 20th century.[36]

European states in 1815.[37]
Monarchies (55) Republics (9)European states in 1914.[38]
Monarchies (22) Republics (4)European states in 1930.[39]
Monarchies (20) Republics (15)European states in 1950.[40]
Monarchies (13) Republics (21)European states in 2015.[41]
Monarchies (12) Republics (35)The French Second Republic  was created in 1848, but abolished by Napoleon III  who proclaimed himself Emperor in 1852. The 
French
Third Republic  was established in 1870, when a civil revolutionary committee refused to accept Napoleon III's surrender during
the Franco-Prussian War. Spain briefly became the First Spanish Republic  in 1873–4, but the monarchy was soon restored. By the
start of the 20th century France, Switzerland and San Marino remained the only republics in Europe. This changed when, after the
1908 Lisbon Regicide, the 5 October 1910 revolution  established the Portuguese Republic. This would encourage new republics
during and in the aftermath of World War I, when several of the largest European empires collapsed: the German Empire, 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, Russian Empire, and Ottoman Empire  were all replaced by republics. New states gained independence during
this turmoil, and many of these, such as Ireland, Poland, Finland  and Czechoslovakia, chose republican forms of government.
Following Greece's defeat in the Greco-Turkish War (1919–22), the monarchy was briefly replaced by the Second Hellenic Republic 
(1924–1935). In 1931, the proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic  (1931–1939) resulted in the Spanish Civil War  that would
be the prelude of World War II.

Republican ideas were spreading, especially in Asia. The United States began to have considerable influence in East Asia in the
later part of the 19th century, with Protestant  missionaries playing a central role. The liberal and republican writers of the
west also exerted influence. These combined with native Confucian  inspired political philosophy that had long argued that the
populace had the right to reject unjust government that had lost the Mandate of Heaven.

Two short-lived republics were proclaimed in East Asia, the Republic of Formosa  and the First Philippine Republic. China had seen
considerable anti-Qing sentiment, and a number of protest movements developed calling for constitutional monarchy. The most
important leader of these efforts was Sun Yat-sen, whose Three Principles of the People  combined American, European, and Chinese
ideas. The Republic of China  was proclaimed on January 1, 1912.

DECOLONIZATION
A map of the Commonwealth republicsIn the years following World War II, most of the remaining European colonies gained their
independence, and most became republics. The two largest colonial powers were France and the United Kingdom. Republican France
encouraged the establishment of republics in its former colonies. the United Kingdom attempted to follow the model it had for its
earlier settler colonies of creating independent Commonwealth realms  still linked under the same monarchy. While most of the
settler colonies and the smaller states of the Caribbean retained this system, it was rejected by the newly independent countries
in Africa and Asia, which revised their constitutions and became republics.

Britain followed a different model in the Middle East; it installed local monarchies in several colonies and mandates including 
Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, Yemen  and Libya. In subsequent decades revolutions and coups  overthrew a number of monarchs
and installed republics. Several monarchies remain, and the Middle East is the only part of the world where several large states
are ruled by monarchs with almost complete political control.[42]

SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
See also: People's Republic  and Socialist state
A poster that commemorates the permanent President of the Republic of China Yuan Shikai and the provisional President of the
RepublicIn the wake of the First World War, the Russian monarchy fell during the Russian Revolution. The Russian Provisional Government 
was established in its place on the lines of a liberal republic, but this was overthrown by the Bolsheviks  who went on to
establish the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. This was the first republic established under Marxist-Leninist  ideology.
Communism was wholly opposed to monarchy, and became an important element of many republican movements during the 20th century.
The Russian Revolution spread into Mongolia, and overthrew its theocratic monarchy in 1924. In the aftermath of the Second World
War the communists gradually gained control of Romania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Hungary  and Albania, ensuring that the states were
reestablished as socialist republics rather than monarchies.

Communism also intermingled with other ideologies. It was embraced by many national liberation movements during decolonization. In
Vietnam, communist republicans pushed aside the Nguyễn Dynasty, and monarchies in neighbouring Laos  and Cambodia  were overthrown
by communist movements in the 1970s. Arab socialism  contributed to a series of revolts and coups that saw the monarchies of Egypt
, Iraq, Libya, and Yemen ousted. In Africa Marxist-Leninism and African socialism  led to the end of monarchy and the proclamation
of republics in states such as Burundi  and Ethiopia.

ISLAMIC REPUBLICS
Main article: Islamic republicIslamic political philosophy has a long history of opposition to absolute monarchy, notably in the
work of Al-Farabi. Sharia law  took precedence over the will of the ruler, and electing rulers by means of the Shura  was an
important doctrine. While the early caliphate  maintained the principles of an elected ruler, later states became hereditary or
military dictatorships though many maintained some pretense of a consultative shura.

None of these states are typically referred to as republics. The current usage of republic in Muslim countries is borrowed from
the western meaning, adopted into the language in the late 19th century.[43]  The 20th century saw republicanism become an
important idea in much of the Middle East, as monarchies were removed in many states of the region. Iraq became a secular state.
Some nations, such as Indonesia  and Azerbaijan, began as secular. In Iran, the 1979 revolution  overthrew the monarchy and
created an Islamic republic  based on the ideas of Islamic democracy.

HEAD OF STATE
STRUCTURE
With no monarch, most modern republics use the title president  for the head of state. Originally used to refer to the presiding
officer of a committee or governing body in Great Britain the usage was also applied to political leaders, including the leaders
of some of the Thirteen Colonies  (originally Virginia in 1608); in full, the "President of the Council."[44]  The first republic
to adopt the title was the United States of America. Keeping its usage as the head of a committee the President of the
Continental
Congress  was the leader of the original congress. When the new constitution was written the title of President of the United
States  was conferred on the head of the new executive branch.

If the head of state of a republic is also the head of government, this is called a presidential system. There are a number of
forms of presidential government. A full-presidential system has a president with substantial authority and a central political
role.

In other states the legislature is dominant and the presidential role is almost purely ceremonial and apolitical, such as in
Germany and India. These states are parliamentary republics  and operate similarly to constitutional monarchies with 
parliamentary
systems  where the power of the monarch is also greatly circumscribed. In parliamentary systems the head of government, most often
titled prime minister, exercises the most real political power. Semi-presidential systems  have a president as an active head of
state, but also have a head of government with important powers.

The rules for appointing the president and the leader of the government, in some republics permit the appointment of a president
and a prime minister who have opposing political convictions: in France, when the members of the ruling cabinet  and the president
come from opposing political factions, this situation is called cohabitation.

In some countries, like Switzerland, Bosnia and Herzegovina  and San Marino, the head of state is not a single person but a
committee (council) of several persons holding that office. The Roman Republic had two consuls, elected for a one year-term by the
 comitia centuriata, consisting of all adult, freeborn males who could prove citizenship.

ELECTIONS
In liberal democracies  presidents are elected, either directly by the people or indirectly by a parliament or council. Typically
in presidential and semi-presidential systems the president is directly elected by the people, or is indirectly elected as done in
the United States. In that country the president is officially elected by an electoral college, chosen by the States, all of which
do so by direct election of the electors. The indirect election of the president through the electoral college conforms to the
concept of republic as one with a system of indirect election. In the opinion of some, direct election confers legitimacy  upon
the president and gives the office much of its political power.[45]  However, this concept of legitimacy differs from that
expressed in the United States Constitution which established the legitimacy of the United States president as resulting from the
signing of the Constitution by nine states.[46]  The idea that direct election is required for legitimacy also contradicts the
spirit of the Great Compromise, whose actual result was manifest in the clause[47]  that provides voters in smaller states with
slightly more representation in presidential selection than those in large states.

In states with a parliamentary system the president is usually elected by the parliament. This indirect election subordinates the
president to the parliament, and also gives the president limited legitimacy and turns most presidential powers into reserve
powers  that can only be exercised under rare circumstance. There are exceptions where elected presidents have only ceremonial
powers, such as in Ireland.

AMBIGUITIES
The distinction between a republic and a monarchy is not always clear. The constitutional monarchies  of the former British Empire
and Western Europe today have almost all real political power vested in the elected representatives, with the monarchs only
holding either theoretical powers, no powers or rarely used reserve powers. Real legitimacy for political decisions comes from the
elected representatives and is derived from the will of the people. While hereditary monarchies remain in place, political power
is derived from the people as in a republic. These states are thus sometimes referred to as crowned republics.[48]

Terms such as liberal republic  are also used to describe all of the modern liberal democracies.[49]

There are also self-proclaimed republics that act similarly to monarchies with absolute power vested in the leader and passed down
from father to son. North Korea and Syria are two notable examples where a son has inherited political control. Neither of these
states are officially monarchies. There is no constitutional requirement that power be passed down within one family, but it has
occurred in practice.

There are also elective monarchies  where ultimate power is vested in a monarch, but the monarch is chosen by some manner of
election. A current example of such a state is Malaysia  where the Yang di-Pertuan Agong  is elected every five years by the 
Conference of Rulers  composed of the nine hereditary rulers of the Malay states, and the Vatican City-State, where the pope  is
selected by cardinal-electors, currently all cardinals  under a specific age. While rare today, elective monarchs were common in
the past. The Holy Roman Empire is an important example, where each new emperor was chosen by a group of electors. Islamic states
also rarely employed primogeniture, instead relying on various forms of election to choose a monarch's successor.

The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth  had an elective monarchy, with a wide suffrage of some 500,000 nobles. The system, known as
the Golden Liberty, had developed as a method for powerful landowners to control the crown. The proponents of this system looked
to classical examples, and the writings of the Italian Renaissance, and called their elective monarchy a rzeczpospolita, based on 
res publica.

SUB-NATIONAL REPUBLICS
This section does not cite  any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  (June 2015)  (Learn how and when to remove this template message)In general being a
republic also implies sovereignty  as for the state to be ruled by the people it cannot be controlled by a foreign power. There
are important exceptions to this, for example, republics in the Soviet Union  were member states which had to meet three criteria
to be named republics:

 1. be on the periphery of the Soviet Union so as to be able to take advantage of their theoretical right to secede;
 2. be economically strong enough to be self-sufficient upon secession; and
 3. be named after at least one million people of the ethnic group which should make up the majority population of said republic.

It is sometimes argued that the former Soviet Union was also a supra-national republic, based on the claim that the member states
were different nations.

Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia  (and earlier names) was a federal entity composed of six republics (Socialist
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Slovenia). Each republic had its parliament,
government, institute of citizenship, constitution, etc... but certain functions were delegated to the federation (army, monetary
matters). Each republic also had a right of self-determination according to the conclusions of the second session of the AVNOJ 
and according to the federal constitution.

States of the United States are required, like the federal government, to be republican in form, with final authority resting with
the people. This was required because the states were intended to create and enforce most domestic laws, with the exception of
areas delegated to the federal government and prohibited to the states. The founding fathers of the country intended most domestic
laws to be handled by the states. Requiring the states to be a republic in form was seen as protecting the citizens' rights and
preventing a state from becoming a dictatorship or monarchy, and reflected unwillingness on the part of the original 13 states
(all independent republics) to unite with other states that were not republics. Additionally, this requirement ensured that only
other republics could join the union.

In the example of the United States, the original 13 British colonies  became independent  states after the American Revolution,
each having a republican form of government. These independent states initially formed a loose confederation called the United
States and then later formed the current United States by ratifying the current U.S. Constitution, creating a union  of sovereign
states  with the union or federal  government also being a republic. Any state joining the union later was also required to be a
republic.

OTHER MEANINGS
POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY
Main article: RepublicanismThe term republic  originated from the writers of the Renaissance as a descriptive term for states that were not monarchies. These
writers, such as Machiavelli, also wrote important prescriptive works describing how such governments should function. These ideas
of how a government and society should be structured is the basis for an ideology known as classical republicanism  or civic
humanism. This ideology is based on the Roman Republic and the city states of Ancient Greece and focuses on ideals such as civic
virtue, rule of law, and mixed government.[50]

This understanding of a republic as a distinct form of government from a liberal democracy  is one of the main theses of the
Cambridge School of historical analysis.[51]  This grew out of the work of J. G. A. Pocock  who in 1975 argued that a series of
scholars had expressed a consistent set of republican ideals. These writers included Machiavelli, Milton, Montesquieu, and the
founders of the United States of America.

Pocock argued that this was an ideology with a history and principles distinct from liberalism.[52]  These ideas were embraced by
a number of different writers, including Quentin Skinner, Philip Pettit[53]  and Cass Sunstein. These subsequent writers have
further explored the history of the idea, and also outlined how a modern republic should function.

UNITED STATES
Main article: Republicanism in the United StatesA distinct set of definitions for the word republic  evolved in the United States. In common parlance, a republic is a state that
does not practice direct democracy  but rather has a government indirectly controlled by the people. This understanding of the
term was originally developed by James Madison, and notably employed in Federalist Paper No. 10. This meaning was widely adopted
early in the history of the United States, including in Noah Webster's dictionary of 1828. It was a novel meaning to the term;
representative democracy was not an idea mentioned by Machiavelli and did not exist in the classical republics.[54]  Also, there
is evidence that contemporaries of Madison considered the meaning of the word to reflect the definition found elsewhere, as is the
case with a quotation of Benjamin Franklin  taken from the notes of James McHenry  where the question is put forth, "a Republic or
a Monarchy?"[55]

The term republic  does not appear in the Declaration of Independence, but does appear in Article IV of the Constitution which
"guarantee[s] to every State in this Union a Republican form of Government." What exactly the writers of the constitution felt
this should mean is uncertain. The Supreme Court, in Luther v. Borden  (1849), declared that the definition of republic  was a "
political question" in which it would not intervene. In two later cases, it did establish a basic definition. In United States v.
Cruikshank  (1875), the court ruled that the "equal rights of citizens" were inherent to the idea of a republic.

However, the term republic  is not synonymous with the republican form. The republican form is defined as one in which the powers
of sovereignty are vested in the people and are exercised by the people, either directly, or through representatives chosen by the
people, to whom those powers are specially delegated. In re Duncan, 139 U.S. 449, 11 S.Ct. 573, 35 L.Ed. 219; Minor v. Happersett,
88 U.S. (21 Wall.) 162, 22 L.Ed. 627. [56]

Beyond these basic definitions the word republic  has a number of other connotations. W. Paul Adams observes that republic  is
most often used in the United States as a synonym for state or government, but with more positive connotations than either of
those terms.[57]  Republicanism is often referred to as the founding ideology of the United States. Traditionally scholars
believed this American republicanism was a derivation of the classical liberal ideologies of John Locke  and others developed in
Europe.

A political philosophy of republicanism that formed during the Renaissance period, and initiated by Machiavelli, was thought to
have had little impact on the founders of the United States. In the 1960s and 1970s a revisionist school[citation needed]  led by
the likes of Bernard Bailyn  began to argue that republicanism was just as or even more important than liberalism in the creation
of the United States.[58]  This issue is still much disputed and scholars like Isaac Kramnick  completely reject this view.[59]

SEE ALSO
 * Commonwealth
 * Democracy
 * Democratic republic
 * Free state
 * List of republics
 * Index: Republics
 * Republicanism
 * Republics of Russia
 * Guarantee Clause  of the U.S. Constitution

REFERENCES
 1.  ^  "Republic - Definition of Republic by Merriam-Webster".
 2.  ^  "republic - government". Encyclopedia Britannica.
 3.  ^ a  b  "Republic". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved August 14,  2010.
 4.  ^  "republic", WordNet 3.0, Dictionary.com, retrieved 20 March  2009
 5.  ^  Everitt, Anthony (2012). The Rise of Rome. New York: Random House. p. 125. ISBN9781400066636.
 6.  ^  Montesquieu, Spirit of the Laws, Bk. II, ch. 2–3.
 7.  ^  "Transcript of the Constitution of the United States - Official Text".
 8.  ^  Bloom, Allan. The Republic. Basic Books, 1991. pp. 439–440
 9.  ^  Rubinstein, Nicolai. "Machiavelli and Florentine Republican Experience" in Machiavelli and Republicanism  Cambridge
     University Press, 1993.
 10. ^ a  b  c  d  e  "Republic"j, New Dictionary of the History of Ideas. Ed. Maryanne Cline Horowitz. Vol. 5. Detroit: Charles
     Scribner's Sons, 2005. p. 2099
 11. ^  Lewis, Charlton T.; Charles Short (1879). "res, II.K". A Latin Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Retrieved 
     August 14,  2010.
 12. ^ a  b  Haakonssen, Knud. "Republicanism." A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy. Robert E. Goodin and Philip
     Pettit. eds. Cambridge: Blackwell, 1995.
 13. ^  Everdell (2000)  p. xxiii.
 14. ^  Nippel, Wilfried. "Ancient and Modern Republicanism." The Invention of the Modern Republic  ed. Biancamaria Fontana.
     Cambridge University Press, 1994 pg. 6
 15. ^  Reno, Jeffrey. "republic." International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences  pg. 184
 16. ^  Pocock, J.G.A. The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition  (1975; new
     ed. 2003)
 17. ^  Paul A. Rahe, Republics, Ancient and Modern, three volumes, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1994.
 18. ^  Martin Bernal, Black Athena Writes Back  (Durham: Duke University Press, 2001), 359.
 19. ^ a  b  Everdell (2000)
 20. ^  UNESCO World Heritage Centre. "Aksum".
 21. ^  "Concepts of Democracy and Democratization in Africa Revisited". Paper presented at the Fourth Annual Kent State
     University Symposium on Democracy. by Apollos O. Nwauwa
 22. ^  16 Mahajanapadas - Sixteen Mahajanapadas, 16 Maha Janapadas India, Maha Janapada Ancient India. Iloveindia.com. Retrieved
     on 2013-07-12.
 23. ^  Anguttara Nikaya I. p 213; IV. pp 252, 256, 261.
 24. ^  Singh, Upinder (2008). A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century. Delhi:
     Pearson Education. pp. 260–4. ISBN978-81-317-1120-0.
 25. ^  http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9074639/Vaisali  Vaisali, Encyclopædia Britannica
 26. ^  Kulke, Hermann; Dietmar Rothermund (2004). A history of India. Routledge. p. 57. ISBN0-415-32919-1.
 27. ^  Sharma, RS. Aspects of Political Ideas and Institutions in Ancient India.  Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 1999 pg. xxix
 28. ^  Chu, Henry (April 2, 2011). "Iceland seeks to become sanctuary for free speech". Los Angeles Times.
 29. ^ a  b  Finer, Samuel. The History of Government from the Earliest Times  Oxford University Press, 1999. pp. 950–955.
 30. ^  Ferdinand Joseph Maria Feldbrugge. Law in Medieval Russia, IDC Publishers, 2009
 31. ^  Finer, pp. 955–956.
 32. ^  Finer, Samuel. The History of Government from the Earliest Times.  Oxford University Press, 1999. pg. 1020.
 33. ^  "Republicanism." Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment  pg. 435
 34. ^  "Introduction." Republicanism: a Shared European Heritage.  By Martin van Gelderen and Quentin Skinner. Cambridge
     University Press, 2002 pg. 1
 35. ^  "Republicanism." Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment  pg. 431
 36. ^  "Latin American Republicanism" New Dictionary of the History of Ideas. Ed. Maryanne Cline Horowitz. Vol. 5. Detroit:
     Charles Scribner's Sons, 2005.
 37. ^  The Ottoman Empire  and Russian Empire  are counted amongst Europe. Counted as republics are the Swiss Confederation, the 
     Free Cities of Hamburg, Bremen, Lübeck  and Frankfurt, the Most Serene Republic of San Marino, the Republic of Cospaia, the 
     Septinsular Republic  and the German Confederation; however, member states of the German Confederation are also separately
     counted (35 monarchies).
 38. ^  The Ottoman Empire  and Russian Empire  are counted amongst Europe.
 39. ^  The Republic of Turkey is counted amongst Europe, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics  as a single republic, the 
     Irish
     Free State  as an independent monarchy (see also Irish head of state from 1936 to 1949), Vatican City as an elective monarchy
     , the Kingdom of Hungary  as a nominal monarchy.
 40. ^  The Republic of Turkey  is counted amongst Europe, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics  as a single republic, the 
     Free
     Territory of Trieste  as an independent republic, Vatican City  as an elective monarchy, the Spanish State  as a nominal
     monarchy.
 41. ^  The Republic of Turkey  is counted amongst Europe, the Russian Federation  as a single republic, the Republic of Kosovo 
     (recognised by most other European states) as an independent republic, Vatican City  as an elective monarchy. The Republic
     of
     Azerbaijan, Georgia, Armenia  and Kazakhstan  are not shown on this map and excluded from the count. The Turkish Republic of
     Northern Cyprus  (recognised only by Turkey) and all other unrecognised states are excluded from the count.
 42. ^  Anderson, Lisa. "Absolutism and the Resilience of Monarchy in the Middle East." Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 106, No.
     1 (Spring, 1991), pp. 1–15
 43. ^  Bernard Lewis. "The Concept of an Islamic Republic" Die Welt des Islams, New Series, Vol. 4, Issue 1 (1955), pp. 1–9
 44. ^  OED, s. v.
 45. ^  "Presidential Systems" Governments of the World: A Global Guide to Citizens' Rights and Responsibilities.  Ed. C. Neal
     Tate. Vol. 4. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2006. p7-11.
 46. ^  Article VII, Constitution of the United States
 47. ^  Article II, Para 2, Constitution of the United States
 48. ^  The novelist and essayist H. G. Wells  regularly used the term crowned republic to describe the United Kingdom, for
     instance in his work A Short History of the World. Alfred, Lord Tennyson  in his poem Idylls of the King.
 49. ^  Dunn, John. "The Identity of the Bourgeois Liberal Republic." The Invention of the Modern Republic. Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1994.
 50. ^  "Republicanism" Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.  Jun 19, 2006
 51. ^  McCormick, John P. "Machiavelli against Republicanism: On the Cambridge School's 'Guicciardinian Moments'" Political
     Theory, Vol. 31, No. 5 (Oct., 2003), pp. 615–643
 52. ^  Pocock, J. G. A The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition  Princeton:
     1975;2003
 53. ^  Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government, NY: Oxford U.P., 1997, ISBN 0-19-829083-7; Oxford:
     Clarendon Press, 1997.
 54. ^  Everdell (2000)  pg. 6
 55. ^  "1593. Benjamin Franklin (1706-90). Respectfully Quoted: A Dictionary of Quotations. 1989".
 56. ^  GOVERNMENT (Republican Form of Government)- One in which the powers of sovereignty are vested in the people and are
     exercised by the people ... directly ... Black's Law Dictionary, Sixth Edition, P. 695
 57. ^  W. Paul Adams "Republicanism in Political Rhetoric Before 1776." Political Science Quarterly, Vol. 85, No. 3 (Sep., 1970),
     pp. 397–421
 58. ^  Bailyn, Bernard. The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
     1967.
 59. ^  Kramnick, Isaac. Republicanism and Bourgeois Radicalism: Political Ideology in Late Eighteenth-Century England and
     America.  Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990.

FURTHER READING
 * Martin van Gelderen & Quentin Skinner, eds., Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, v1, Republicanism and Constitutionalism
   in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press., 2002
 * Martin van Gelderen & Quentin Skinner, eds., Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, v2, The Values of Republicanism in
   Early Modern Europe, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 2002
 * Willi Paul Adams, “Republicanism in Political Rhetoric before 1776,” Political Science Quarterly  85(1970), p397-421.
 * Joyce Appleby, “Republicanism in Old and New Contexts,” in William & Mary Quarterly, 3rd series, 43(January, 1986), p3-34.
 * Joyce Appleby, ed., “Republicanism” issue of American Quarterly  37(Fall, 1985).
 * Sarah Barber, Regicide and Republicanism: Politics and Ethics in the English Republic, 1646-1649, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
   University Press, 1998.
 * Gisela Bock, Quentin Skinner & Maurizio Viroli, eds., Machiavelli and Republicanism, Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 1990.
 * Everdell, William R. (2000), The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans  (2nd ed.), Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press
 * Eric Gojosso, Le concept de république en France (XVIe -XVIIIe siècle), Aix/Marseille, 1998, pp205–245.
 * James Hankins, "Exclusivist Republicanism and the Non-Monarchical Republic," Political Theory  38.4 (August 2010), 452-482.
 * Frédéric Monera, L'idée de République et la jurisprudence du Conseil constitutionnel  — Paris: L.G.D.J., 2004 Fnac, LGDJ.fr
 * Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997, pp. x and 304.
 * J. G. A. Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition, Princeton:
   Princeton University Press, 1975
 * J. G. A. Pocock, “Between Gog and Magog: The Republican Thesis and the Ideologia Americana,” Journal of the History of Ideas 
   48(1987), p<341>
 * J. G. A. Pocock, "The Machiavellian Moment  Revisited: A Study in History and Ideology” Journal of Modern History  53(1981)
 * Paul A. Rahe, Republics Ancient and Modern: Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution, 3v., Chapel Hill: U. of North
   Carolina Press 1992, 1994.
 * Jagdish P. Sharma, Republics in ancient India, c. 1500 B.C.-500 B.C., 1968
 * David Wootton, ed., Republicanism, Liberty, and Commercial Society, 1649-1776  (The Making of Modern Freedom series), Stanford,
   CA: Stanford University Press, 1994.

• Thomas Corwin, Senate Speech Against the Mexican War-Congressional Globe 1847

Speech of U.S. Senator against the Mexican–American War characterizing it as imperialist and presidentialEXTERNAL LINKS
 * William R. Everdell, “From State to Freestate: The Meaning of the Word Republic from Jean Bodin to John Adams”  (7th ISECS,
   Budapest, 7/31/87) in Valley Forge Journal, June, 1991

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Republic.Wikimedia Commons has media related to Republics.Look up republic  in Wiktionary,
the free dictionary.Wikiquote has quotations related to: RepublicAuthority control * LCCN: sh85112978
 * GND: 4177823-6